Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Appetite
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/appet
Meat-related cognitive dissonance: A conceptual framework for
understanding how meat eaters reduce negative arousal from eating animals
Hank Rothgerber
Bellarmine University, 2001 Newberg Rd, Louisville, KY, 40205, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Meat eatingCognitive dissonance
Dissonance reduction
Attitudes toward meatABSTRACT
Meat eaters encounter a con ﬂict between their eating behavior and their a ﬀections toward animals. Because this
“meat paradox ”highlights discrepancies between behavior and various ideals, a number of experts have focused
on cognitive dissonance theory to explain the psychology of eating meat. The present work presents a framework
to understand the phenomenon of meat-related cognitive dissonance (MRCD), herein de ﬁned as occurring when the
dissonant state involves recognition of one's behavior as a meat eater and a belief, attitude, or value that thisbehavior contradicts. The proposed framework explains how individuals attempt to prevent this form of dis-
sonance from occurring (e.g., avoidance, willful ignorance, dissociation, perceived behavioral change, and do-gooder
derogation ) and how they reduce it once it has occurred in the form of motivated cognitions (e.g., denigrating
animals, o ﬀering pro-meat justi ﬁcations, or denying responsibility for eating meat ). The MRCD framework posits that
which of a possible ﬁfteen outlets is chosen to prevent and reduce the moral guilt associated with eating meat
depends on (a) the aspect of meat consumption that produces MRCD; (b) the motivation created by MRCD; (c)
individual di ﬀerences in gender, values, a ﬃnity toward animals and meat, and exposure to animals; and (d)
culture. Implications of the framework for those seeking to curtail meat consumption are discussed and im-portant questions are highlighted for theorists to resolve.
“The shift from traditional hunting to progressively more and more
intensive systems of animal exploitation has been accompanied by
the evolution of increasingly sophisticated methods of evading guilt
…we are confronted with a hideous moral dilemma …our highly
developed social awareness allows us to understand and empathizewith animals …it also allows us to use animals and manipulate
them to our own advantage. ”(Serpell, 1986, pp. 209– 210)
The recent decade has witnessed a boom in research investigating
the psychology of eating meat, as a diverse set of contingents havebecome interested in how meat eaters are able to justify and rationalizetheir eating behavior in the face of external threats. Animal rights
proponents, environmentalists, and others have sought to identify the
psychological underpinnings behind the maintenance of meat con-
sumption, with the aim of countering such resistance in more e ﬀective
inﬂuence campaigns. Theorists have viewed meat eating as a compel-
ling case of how individuals make moral decisions and rationalize
morally problematic behavior, as meat has come to be framed. It also
provides an opportunity to examine how individuals negotiate in-
trapersonal con ﬂicts–as noted researcher Paul Rozin once commented,
“meat should be of special interest to psychologists, because it is a
quintessential example of the interesting and important state ofambivalence ”(2007, p. 404).
This ambivalence, or what some legal scholars have more strongly
termed “moral schizophrenia ”(Francione, 2004)o r “moral hypocrisy ”
(Sunstein, 2004), is manifested in the frequent misalignment between
expressed attitudes and behavior toward animals. Numerous studiesshow that while individuals want farmed animals to be humanely
treated, they simultaneously eat meat derived almost entirely from
factory farms documented for their abysmal treatment of animals (e.g.,
Clark, Stewart, Panzone, Kyriazakis, & Frewer, 2016 ;Knight,
Nunkoosing, Vrij, & Cherryman, 2003 ;Miele, 2010, pp. 1 –16;Te Velde,
Aarts, & Van Woerkum, 2002 ;Vanhonacker, Verbeke, Van Poucke, &
Tuyttens, 2007). That individuals love animals and wish them no harmyet simultaneously eat them has been termed the meat paradox (Bastian,
Loughnan, Haslam, & Radke, 2012 ;Loughnan, Bastian, & Haslam,
2014 ;Loughnan & Davies, in press; Loughnan, Haslam, & Bastian,
2010 ). Because this paradox highlights discrepancies between behavior
and various ideals, an increasing number of experts have focused on
cognitive dissonance theory (CDT) to explain the psychology of eating
meat (e.g., Bastian & Loughnan, 2017 ;Rothgerber, 2014a ;Rothgerber,
2019,
in press; Rothgerber, 2019b).
CDT is widely held to involve a three-step process: an inconsistency
generates an aversive arousal (i.e., the cognitive dissonance state) that
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2019.104511
Received 14 May 2019; Received in revised form 3 November 2019; Accepted 4 November 2019E-mail address: hrothgerber@bellarmine.edu .Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
Available online 07 November 2019
0195-6663/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Twill then motivate reduction strategies ( Vaidis & Bran, 2018 ). The
present work deﬁ nes the phenomenon of meat-related cognitive dis-
sonance (MRCD) as occurring when the arousal is speci ﬁcally related to
one's status as a meat eater; that is, the cognitive dissonance state in-
volves recognition of one's behavior as a meat eater and a belief, atti-
tude, or value that this behavior contradicts, such as the aforemen-
tioned love of animals. For individuals who care about the well-being of
animals, the question may be economically modeled as a trade-o ﬀbe-
tween the utility gained from eating meat and the psychological dis-utility implied by their awareness of the su ﬀering in ﬂicted upon farm
animals ( Hestermann, Le Yaouanq, & Treich, 2018 ;Rabin, 1994 ). Al-
though related to the meat paradox, MRCD refers to a more encom-
passing phenomenon; that is, MRCD can also be experienced over
concerns that eating meat is harmful to the environment or to personal
health, but in keeping with the literature on the meat paradox, here I
largely focus on animal welfare-related triggers and cognitions.
The goal of the current work is to o ﬀer a framework to better un-
derstand MRCD, in particular (a) explaining how individuals attempt to
prevent this dissonance from occurring and how they reduce it once it
has occurred, i.e., what Serpell (1986) referred to in the opening quote
as the “sophisticated methods of evading guilt, ”and (b) identifying
what speci ﬁc factors may predict the popularity of these dissonance
prevention and reducing mechanisms. Implications for those seekingsocial change are identi ﬁed as are important questions remaining for
theorists to resolve.
1. Overview of the MRCD framework and its propositions
In developing the MRCD framework, the author drew upon classical
dissonance theory but also borrowed insights from several theories
describing mechanisms that enable individuals to act in immoral or
non-normative ways: Bandura's (1990, 1999) theory of moral disen-
gagement and Sykes and Matza ’s (1957) work on techniques of neu-
tralization. Bandura suggested that while actions are typically governed
by an individual's moral standards, there are processes that disengage
these self-sanctions and allow for inhumane conduct. Sykes and Matza
(1957) examined justi ﬁcations of deviant behavior (i.e., “techniques of
neutralization ”) that allow disapproval from others or from violating
internalized norms to be blunted in advance. The processes proposed bythese scholars from di ﬀerent disciplines converge on three basic guilt-
reducing mechanisms enabling problematic behavior: (1) hiding oravoiding the injury, possibly by making the victim invisible; (2) de-
nying one's role/responsibility in causing the harm; and (3) denigrating
the victim.
The present work also assimilates and elaborates on techniques
identiﬁed by several authors who have explored the paradox of meat
eating: Serpell (1986) , whose quote begins the article and who ﬁrst
identiﬁed four “distancing devices ”by
 which meat eaters separate
themselves from the morally dubious consequences of eating meat;Rothgerber (2014a) , who more recently articulated eight mechanisms
to mitigate MRCD; and Joy (2011) , who developed the notion of
carnism, a dominant ideology conditioning people to consume certain
animal products and supported by a variety of defense mechanisms and
mostly unchallenged assumptions. This suggests that much of the time,
eating meat is not a troubling, encumbering behavior and that in-
dividuals are able to co-exist with signi ﬁcant contradictions arising
from their eating behavior on a daily basis. The current frameworkoﬀers that there are a number of mechanisms to suppress the moral
inconsistencies inherent in eating certain animals and that it is onlywhen some situation or event disrupts the invisibility of carnism or callseating meat into question that individuals will partake in what Joy
(2011) refers to as defense mechanisms, i.e., what the present work
considers MRCD reduction mechanisms.
Critical assumptions of the MRCD framework are rooted in the in-
ﬂuential psychological theory of motivated cognition ( Kunda, 1990 ).
There is considerable evidence that people are unwittingly more likelyto arrive at conclusions that they desire through a biased process of
memory search and belief construction ( Kunda, 1990). Although beliefs
are often motivated to satisfy psychic or instrumental needs ( Bénabou &
Tirole, 2016), individuals attempt to be rational and to construct a
justiﬁcation of their preferred conclusion that would persuade others
(Kunda, 1990 ). Motivated reasoning also applies to situations which
feature morally problematic behavior: Individuals will adopt self-ser-
ving beliefs when facing moral dilemmas to maintain a sense of having
a moral self-concept ( Barkan, Ayal, & Ariely, 2015 ;Shalvi, Barkan, &
Ayal, 2015 ). These justi ﬁcations may occur before an event, lessening
the anticipated threat to one's moral self by deﬁ ning questionable be-
haviors as excusable, or after an event, lessening the experienced threatto the moral self by compensating for the committed violation ( Barkan
et al., 2015 ;Shalvi, Gino, Barkan, & Ayal, 2015 ). Although this dis-
tinction between anticipated and experienced dissonance may not be
critical in the case of such a frequently occurring behavior as eating
meat, the moral dissonance research portends the assertion that beliefs
about farm animals and meat eating are not objective but instead are
motivated, and hence susceptible to ﬂuctuation. A general implication
of the dissonance perspective is that the very act of consuming meatdetermines perceptions related to meat and to animal welfare.
Fig. 1 presents a general outline of the MRCD framework. As shown
on the left side of Fig. 1, the framework speculates that MRCD is ty-
pically experienced by certain situational triggers, such as being re-minded of farm animals, being exposed to information about farm an-
imal welfare, connecting meat to these farm animals, recognizing
oneself as an eater of these animals, or being in the presence of vege-
tarians, who make the above reminders salient. The framework pro-
poses that individuals will be motivated to use avoidance, willful ig-
norance, dissociation, perceived behavioral change, and do-gooder
derogation to block MRCD from occurring. Research examining each of
these tactics is reviewed. If individuals prevent these triggers from ever
occurring, the framework postulates that their meat-eating behaviorwill be maintained with no further psychological justi ﬁcations or dis-
tortions necessary.
If these catalysts are unchecked though, the framework proposes
that individuals will experience MRCD and its unpleasant arousal. Tocounter MRCD once it has occurred, the framework suggests that in-
dividuals may change their behavior, or more likely, strategically dis-
tort their perceptions to reduce the moral guilt associated with eating
meat. These motivated cognitions are expected to focus on denigrating
animals, o ﬀering pro-meat justi ﬁcations,
 or denying responsibility for
eating meat. Empirical evidence reviewing these strategies is con-sidered. An important implication of the framework is that the outcome
is predicted to be quite di ﬀerent depending on which MRCD mechanism
is adopted. In the case of behavioral change, reduced meat consumptionis expected to result and any ensuing MRCD ameliorated; when per-
ceptual distortions are endorsed, the meat-eating behavior is not only
expected to be maintained but strengthened, as increased psychological
justiﬁcation has occurred, and individuals need to remain vigilant
about preventing future MRCD.
The MRCD framework posits that which outlet is chosen to reduce
MRCD depends on (a) the aspect of meat consumption that producesMRCD; (b) the motivation created by MRCD; (c) individual di ﬀerences
in gender, values, ideology, a ﬃnity toward animals and meat, and ex-
posure to farm animals; and (d) culture. Current evidence pertaining to
these hypothesized predictors of preferred perceptual strategy largely
focus on individual di ﬀerences; hence, the discussion of these other
factors remains largely speculative. The manuscript concludes with anexploratory discussion on implications of the framework for researchers
and activists. It reviews research aimed at targeting certain prevention
and reduction strategies, highlights a methodological implication of the
framework, and discusses exogenous factors that have relevance for the
framework, including the price of meat, the rise of plant-based meat
substitutes, and the role of campaigns to increase the moral awareness
of animal su ﬀering. It is suggested that each of these three factors mayH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
2potentially increase negative arousal from eating meat and will subse-
quently activate motivational processes to reduce this unpleasant cog-
nitive dissonance state.
2. Triggers of, and mechanisms to prevent MRCD
Because MRCD is deﬁ ned as producing an unpleasant emotional
state, a chief premise is that meat eaters will be highly motivated to
avoid the experience in the ﬁrst place. Indeed, in Festinger ’s (1957)
classic formulation of cognitive dissonance, one of the main postulateswas that individuals will actively avoid situations and information that
would likely increase dissonance. The MRCD prevention mechanisms are
designed to help the individual forget that they eat meat or that eatingmeat entails animal su ﬀering. These strategies have been termed
“apologetic ”(Rothgerber, 2013) and essentially seek to avoid re-
cognizing and acknowledging that a behavior and belief are at tension.
The individual acts ambivalently, without rationalizations, and merely
attempts to proceed without confronting the issue. Avoidance of dis-
sonance-producing stimuli precludes the need for behavioral or psy-
chological amendments to diet, which could prove stressful and costly.
Thus, it is proposed that the ﬁrst strategy to eliminate MRCD is to
avoid and respond to triggers that threaten to bring the tension to
consciousness. Although there are a multitude of such situations that
can threaten meat eaters and remind them that their behavior is under
question, and such events can vary in their intensity, triggers are con-
sidered to fall into one of ﬁve general categories: (1) exposure to in-
formation about the treatment of factory-farmed animals; (2) remindersthat meat originates from an animal; (3) admission that one eats meat;
(4) admission that one eats meat from an animal that was harmed; and
(5) the presence of vegetarians. Triggers and corresponding preventive
mechanisms are considered in detail along with supporting evidence.
2.1. Information exposure: avoidance and willful ignorance
The MRCD framework espouses that there are two preliminary lines
of psychological defense against exposure to the information needed to
produce MRCD in the ﬁrst place. The initial psychological shield is
avoidance ; that is, to avoid dissonance by refusing to acknowledge or
think about eating meat or animal welfare. The sheer physical isolation
of factory farms from the rest of society is one way that individuals areassisted in avoiding thoughts about the treatment of animals used forfood ( Plous, 1993; Serpell, 1986 ;Singer, 2002 ). As Bandura (1999)
notes, harming others is made easier when their su ﬀering is not visible.
Serpell (1986) labels his ﬁrst distancing device detachment and notes
that this removal of animals from our moral concern is in part ac-complished by the lack of physical contact with them. Detachment also
works in concert with concealment (Serpell, 1986 ), whereby farmed
animals are kept in anonymous-looking, windowless buildings hiding
them from public view. The invisibility continues as they are surrepti-
tiously transported to slaughter, which is almost always concealed
away from residential areas.
Print and visual media also promote avoidance of the reality of meat
production by socializing American children that meat originates from
happy farm animals living in peaceful settings; as a result, children
believe that farm animals are less likely to be unhappy relative to
companion animals and wild animals ( Plous, 1993 ). Avoidance of
MRCD has also been culturally enabled by institutions in Americansociety that make gaining more information about the welfare of farm
animals nearly impossible, including legal guidelines protecting the
privacy and secrecy of factory farms ( Foer, 2009). Finally, if individuals
allow themselves exposure to information about farmed animals, socialpressure
discourages spreading this knowledge to others –the very
topic of factory farms is considered a taboo conversation ( Iacobbo &
Iacobbo, 2006 ). In essence, avoidance has become a cultural norm
protected by powerful institutions (see Bastian & Loughnan, 2017 ).
Given these protections, it is not surprising that individuals are
largely unaware of the treatment of animals that are eaten as meat.Majorities in the U.S. believe that farmed animals are treated humanely
or well ( The Sentience Institute, 2017), and the majority of Europeans
across several nations believe that animal welfare is “good, ”at least for
cows ( Mayﬁeld, Bennett, Tranter, & Wooldridge, 2007 ); moreover, the
majority of these European consumers believe that farmed animalwelfare is improving in their country ( Mayﬁeld et al., 2007 ;Miele,
2010 , pp. 1– 16). Many consumers candidly admit that they are not as
well informed about animal welfare issues as they wish to be ( Mayﬁeld
et al., 2007 ), especially food production processes ( Kriﬂik & Yeatman,
2005 ). Several interview studies have revealed that individuals are too
ignorant of animal use procedures to reach informed opinions, or thatthey have a negative perception of the life of meat livestock without
concrete knowledge of the circumstances in which these animals livedFig. 1. The MRCD framework.H. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
3(Knight & Barnett, 2008 ;Te Velde et al., 2002 ). Several studies in
Australia have also emphasized widespread ignorance of routine prac-
tices subjected to farmed animals ( Coleman & Toukhsati, 2006;
Worsley, Wang, & Ridley, 2015 ). Meat eaters are particularly ignorant
of the conditions faced by farm animals, displaying less knowledge than
vegetarians of harsh farming practices commonly employed and un-
derestimating the degree of su ﬀering in ﬂicted on livestock
(Hestermann, Le Yaouanq, & Treich, 2018). This study's ﬁnding that
meat eaters with greater education were as equally ignorant as those
with less education suggests that meat consumption is not approached
objectively where greater access to information impacts decisions.
Rather, the MRCD framework would speculate that this ignorance is
motivated, i.e., a willful ignorance designed to prevent individuals from
experiencing aversive arousal from MRCD. In this sense, it may be in-terpreted as a second line of defense against exposure to information
about farm animal welfare and may serve as the individual-level
counterpart to the structural forces enabling avoidance of MRCD.
Standard models of economics specify that consumers are advantaged
when they receive information about the consequences of their actions,
but here, knowledge of farm animal treatment increases the costs of
eating meat by requiring greater self-deception to justify it
(Hestermann, Le Yaouanq, & Treich, 2018 ). Evidence for willful ig-
norance in the domain of farmed animal welfare is fairly limited butincreasing. In several investigations, interviewees explicitly claimed
they did not know about farming practices and animal welfare because
they wished to remain ignorant ( Knight et al., 2003), and in some cases,
because they knew that such information would make it more emo-tionally di ﬃcult to purchase meat ( Knight & Barnett, 2008 ;Miele,
2010 , pp. 1– 16). Te Velde et al. (2002) described a “functional ignor-
ance, ”among their Dutch interviewees in that neither farmers nor
consumers actively sought information concerning animal welfare be-cause both parties would be better o ﬀnot knowing too much. To some
extent, such motivated ignorance is an e ﬀective barrier, as one study
found that the less respondents knew about various animal use proce-dures, the more they supported these procedures ( Knight et al., 2003 ).
Taking a decidedly more quantitative approach using cluster analysis,Onwezen and van der Weele (2016) found that 27 –28% of individuals
displayed willful ignorance in the context of meat, deliberately ignoringinformation about the treatment of farmed animals.
Overall, inhibiting thoughts of farm animals and their welfare from
reaching consciousness appears to be a highly successful strategy for
preventing MRCD from ever taking root. In one study, 67% of re-
spondents indicated that they do not think about animal su ﬀering when
they purchase meat ( Signicom, 1997 ). Of those who consider animal
welfare to be highly important, only about half report thinking about it
when purchasing meat ( Mayﬁeld et al., 2007 ). Consistently, studies
have shown that participants report being willing to pay extra for an-imal welfare-friendly products, yet these products only capture a small
share of the market ( Norwood, 2011 ;Roex
 & Miele, 2005). Similarly,
voters in California overwhelmingly rejected farming practices thatwere represented in products that at that time dominated the market
(Norwood & Lusk, 2011 ). Elaborating on Hestermann, Le Yaouanq, &
Treich, 2018 suggestion that the salience of the moral aspects of these
decisions depends on the environment in which individuals make their
decisions (e.g., grocery store vs. voting booth), one may add that
avoidance has largely rendered consumer decision makers not con-
scious of animal welfare when purchasing meat, in e ﬀect muting much
MRCD.
2.2. Reminders that meat originates from an animal: dissociation
Meat eaters ’avoidance of thinking about eating meat or animal
welfare is potentially challenged whenever they confront animal ﬂesh
on their plate. The present framework asserts that individuals can also
prevent MRCD by pretending that no animal is involved during meat
consumption. This disconnect is accomplished by dissociating the animalfrom the food product. Even though they consume animal ﬂesh, a de-
lusion suggesting otherwise is promoted. According to Adams (1990) ,
one way that individuals render animals absent from their conscious-ness is to change language about them as food products. Words like
bacon, hamburger, and sirloin become substitutes for the animal ﬂesh
people consume allowing meat eaters to maintain the illusion that an-imals are not involved. The need for verbal concealment decreases the
further the animal is from a human being, thus “chicken, ”and “ﬁsh”are
called by their actual animal names ( Serpell, 1986 ).Plous (1993) dis-
cusses a number of ways in which language depicts animals as in-
animate (e.g., hunters do not kill animals, they “harvest ”them –see
also, Serpell, 1986 ), including usage by the military and legal system.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has helped people
feel more comfortable about eating meat by referring to chickens, cows,
and pigs as “grain-consuming animal units. ”AsBandura (1999) notes,
such euphemistic labeling is often used to disguise objectionable ac-tivities.
Supporting this dissociation strategy, many consumers do not like to
think that meat comes from a live animal ( Mayﬁeld et al., 2007 ), and
this explains why the more meat resembles the actual animal, in termsof being red, bloody, and fatty, the more individuals are disgusted by it
(Kubberoed, Ueland, Tronstad, & Risvik, 2002a ). Pieces of meat that
clearly remind the consumer that they were from an animal (e.g., eyes,tongues, brains, etc.) are unwillingly handled by consumers ( Kubberoed
et al., 2002b ). Explicitly reminding shoppers about the animal origins
of meat lead them to purchase less meat or prefer free range and or-
ganic meat ( Hoogland, de Boer, & Boersema, 2005).
Kunst and Hohle (2016) manipulated
 dissociation experimentally
by depicting meat as more rather than less processed, minced as op-
posed to having a head, as advertised without a picture of an animal as
opposed to with, in more euphemistic terms (harvest) than less
(slaughter), and described in food terms (pork, beef) rather than as the
animal (pig, cow). As expected, greater dissociation led to more will-ingness to eat the animal, and less empathy, perceived animal capacity,
and disgust in eating the animal. Subsequent research showed that this
eﬀect was moderated by cultural exposure to unprocessed meat ( Kunst
& Haugestad, 2018 ). At least in certain cultures, therefore, ignoring the
link between animals and meat serves to spare the individual from
experiencing uncomfortable dissonance by making it seem as though no
victim was involved.
2.3. Admission that one is a meat eater: perceived behavioral change
Theﬁrst two MRCD prevention tactics ultimately attempt to disrupt
thoughts that meat eaters are bringing harm to animals. The framework
contends that dissonance may also be prevented by convincing oneself
that even if meat involves animals, the individual does not consume
very much of it. This is in e ﬀect a tactic to suppress MRCD by pre-
tending that the troubling behavior does not really apply to them. Inone study, when threatened with the prospects of watching a PETA
documentary about meat production, women (but not men) reported
eating less meat than did a control condition not expecting to watch
such a documentary ( Rothgerber, 2019b ). As a substitute to actual
change and in an e ﬀort to eliminate the belief “I eat meat ”despite
evidence to the contrary, individuals strategically attempted to con-
vince themselves and others that they avoid meat consumption. Also
attesting to the motivated nature of self-report, three times as many
Americans indicated that they had decreased meat consumption as
opposed to increased it during the last three years ( Neﬀet al., 2018),
and 54% expressed that they were attempting to reduce consumption of
animal-based products ( The Sentience Institute, 2017 ), claims di ﬃcult
to reconcile with a general pattern of increased meat consumption inthe U.S. as reported by the USDA.
This perceived behavioral change strategy may be common and a ﬀect
reported dietary identity: At least a dozen studies have documented
that some people claim they are vegetarian but then simultaneouslyH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
4acknowledge that they eat red meat, chicken, and/or ﬁsh (see
Rothgerber, 2014b ). As an example, a survey of 10,000 American adults
found that 60% of vegetarians admitted that they had eaten red meat,
poultry, or seafood within the last 24 h ( Time/CNN/Harris Interactive
Poll, 2002 ). It is clear that estimates of vegetarianism are predicated
upon how vegetarianism is deﬁ ned, with self-identi ﬁcation yielding
higher estimates than behavioral reports. Across several representativestudies in the U.S., approximately 7% self-identi ﬁed as vegetarian, yet
when asked about their speci ﬁc eating habits, only somewhere between
1 and 2.5% were strict vegetarians ( Maurer, 2010 ). Although some of
this discrepancy may arise from genuine confusion about what de ﬁnes a
vegetarian, from a dissonance perspective some of it may also re ﬂect
wishful thinking designed to make oneself feel less guilty aboutharming animals, the environment, or personal health.
2.4. Admission that one eats meat from an animal that was harmed: so-
called humane meat eater
The aforementioned strategies converge on muting thoughts about
animals or that one eats animals. The MRCD framework also contendsthat individuals may embrace their meat consumption but prevent
MRCD by emphasizing that the meat that they eat is not associated with
harming animals because it is humanely produced. These so called
“conscientious omnivores ”(COs) have been on the rise since the merits
of the position were argued in an essay by Michael Pollan (2002) .O f
relevance here, COs are less likely to perceive their diet as something
that they absolutely need to follow and report violating their diet more
(Rothgerber, 2015a ). Thus, although COs may have multiple motives
for their position, the MRCD framework interprets the movement insome ways as providing a shield against dissonance for those who still
consume meat derived from cruel treatment. To a lesser extent, in-dividuals may convince themselves that traditionally raised food ani-
mals do not have it so bad ( “the pigpens are nice and warm, ”“the
chickens always have enough to eat ”), reasoning identi ﬁed by Te Velde
et al. (2002) in interviews with Dutch consumers and farmers. As fur-
ther evidence of this wishful thinking, Worsley et al. (2015) found that
the majority of Australians believed that farmers take good care of li-
vestock.
2.5. The presence of vegetarians: do-gooder derogation
The mechanisms reviewed so far are hypothesized to impede MRCD
by eliminating the awareness that individuals harm animals through
their eating behavior. MRCD may also be activated by the presence of
or reminders of vegetarians ( Rothgerber, 2014a ). Because they are a
meaningful category that carries strong associations, the presence ofvegetarians may encourage self-categorization as a meat eater, espe-
cially to the extent that the context emphasizes di ﬀerences between
vegetarians and omnivores and similarities within each group ( ﬁt: see
Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher, & Wetherell, 1987). In such cases, it is
speculated that omnivores will temporarily think of themselves as meat
eaters and as a result of diet being salient, will be reminded of the
dissonance they experience from eating meat. This would be an unusual
occurrence because as members of a very large majority, meat eaters
almost never deﬁ ne themselves in these terms (see Joy, 2011 ). Carnism
is a largely invisible ideology, but vegetarians potentially reduce thisinvisibility and threaten the prevailing belief system that encourages
meat consumption. Vegetarians not only encourage reminders of dis-sonance,
they also may threaten to make it harder to alleviate the
dissonance and to morally disengage from the harm in ﬂicted upon
animals used for food. That is, vegetarians are particularly threateningbecause they undermine the dissonance-reducing strategies used by
meat eaters (see Rothgerber, 2014a ). For example, vegetarians un-
dercut the notion that meat eaters have no choice but to consume meatfor their well-being and survival ( Rothgerber, 2014a ).
Vegetarians also potentially represent a counter ideology tocarnism, through the promotion of a belief system that killing animals
for food is unethical. The rejection of traditional values that is asso-
ciated with vegetarians helps explain why the symbolic foods of holi-
days are notable sources of tension between vegetarians and family
members ( Beardsworth & Keil, 1991 ,1992 ;Jabs, Sobal, & Devine,
2000 ) and why some parents interpret their children's vegetarianism as
a rejection of their upbringing ( Beardsworth & Keil, 1991, 1992). In
short, it is in large measure what vegetarians signify that threatens meateaters.
There is accumulating evidence that individuals are threatened by
those they perceive as taking moral positions that they themselves are
unwilling to take ( Monin, Sawyer, & Marquez, 2008; O'Connor &
Monin, 2016 ). In a study of consumer behavior, Zane, Irwin, and
Reczek (2016) found that those seeking out ethical product information
were denigrated as morally superior rebels by those ignoring such in-formation. Sykes and Matza (1957) label this strategy “condemning the
condemner. ”The transgressor shifts the focus of attention from their
own deviant acts to the motives and behavior of those who disapprove
of their violations, who may be “hypocrites, deviants in disguise, or
impelled by personal spite ”(Sykes & Matza, 1957 , p. 668).
By failing to engage in normative eating behavior, often for ethical
reasons, vegetarians would seemingly qualify as moral rebels concernedwith the ethical attributes of food and subject to the same denigration.
Indeed, MacInnis and Hodson (2017) found that vegetarians and vegans
were evaluated as or more negatively than other commonly studiedtargets of prejudice (e.g., homosexuals, Blacks) –only drug addicts were
evaluated more negatively. Minson and Monin (2012) found that nearly
half of meat eaters generated negative associations of vegetarians.
Consistent with their concept of “do-gooder derogation ,”this eﬀect was
stronger for participants who believed vegetarians considered them-selves superior to the participant or to meat eaters in general, and for
those participants who anticipated moral reproach from vegetarians
before making judgments about them. Manipulating anticipated moralreproach from vegetarians also led meat eaters to report greater dis-
sonance-related negative emotions ( Rothgerber, 2014a ). This same
study found further evidence of vegetarian-induced dissonance to bereduced in part by critiquing or focusing on de ﬁciencies of the vege-
tarian. Speci ﬁcally, exposure to vegetarians that were imposters, pre-
sented as having allergies necessitating their vegetarianism, and in-
consistent in their practice led meat eaters to give less endorsement to
dissonance reducing strategies, presumably because these “weaker ”
vegetarians
provoked less arousal ( Rothgerber, 2014a ). In summary,
the present framework postulates that denigrating vegetarians helps
prevent meat eaters from experiencing or contemplating MRCD and
instead diverts attention elsewhere.
As shown in Fig. 1, the framework expects that when individuals
prevent MRCD from occurring in the ﬁrst place, they will continue
eating meat at the same incidence. The lack of a con ﬂict or aversive
arousal from their eating behavior would suggest that in these instances
individuals have not undergone additional pressures to convince
themselves that eating meat is moral. The lack of further psychological
justiﬁcations would suggest that they should continue to eat meat
regularly, habitually (see Bastian & Loughnan, 2017) without scrutiny.
3. Mechanisms to reduce MRCD: behavioral change andperceptual change
Thus far, the paper has reviewed six mechanisms by which meat
eaters avoid and respond to triggers that threaten to bring to con-sciousness the tension between their eating behavior and a belief, at-titude, or value related to animal welfare, environmental protection, or
the promotion of personal health. Despite e ﬀorts to prevent MRCD from
taking root, however, there are situations in which meat eaters ex-perience aversive arousal. On these occasions, as shown in Fig. 1,i ti s
proposed that at least one of the MRCD reduction mechanisms will likely
be employed to dissipate the cognitive dissonance state. It seemsH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
5unlikely that individuals would choose to reduce dissonance by de-
creasing what classical dissonance theory terms discrepant cognitions.
This would involve either the individual (a) convincing themselves that
they do not love animals or want them to be treated well, or at least that
these attitudes are unimportant, or (b) changing their eating behavior
so that it becomes consistent with their pro-animal beliefs. While be-
havioral change is the goal of non-governmental organisation (NGO)
activism, statistics indicate that abandoning a meat-based diet is not an
entirely popular mode of dissonance reduction.
Over the last 30– 35 years, average meat consumption in the U.S.
actually increased from 176 to 240 pounds a year ( Herzog, 2010 ), in-
creasing at the fastest rate in four decades during 2015. In animalterms, the number of creatures killed to satisfy a family of four bal-
looned from 56 animals a year to 132 animals during the same time
period. According to the USDA, per capita meat consumption in the U.S.
neared a record high in 2018. An upward trajectory is also predicted to
continue in the rest of North America and globally, where meat con-
sumption has likewise been on the rise ( Organisation for Economic Co-
Operation and Development, 2014 ); projections estimate that meat
consumption will increase in North America by 8%, in Europe by 7%
and in Asia by 56% from 2011 to 2020 ( OECD, 2014 ). Conversely, rates
of vegetarianism are low –the practice is estimated at 5% in both the
U.S. ( Gallup, 2018) and in Europe ( Statista, 2016 ).
Rather, the framework posits that individuals are likely to live with
the signi ﬁcant contradictions posed by their eating behavior and in-
stead reduce MRCD through perceptual change by adopting motivated,
unapologetic justi ﬁcations, rationalizations, and other strategic per-
ceptions that explain away the troubling eating behavior –what clas-
sical dissonance theory ( Festinger, 1957 ) would term consonant cogi-
tions. In Serpell ’s (1986) terms, “We fabricate elaborate and often
mythological justi ﬁcation for their su ﬀering that absolves us of blame ”
(p. 211). Researchers have developed several measures that identify thejustiﬁcations that meat eaters endorse to convince themselves that
eating meat is defensible, including the Meat-Eating Justi ﬁcation Scale
(MEJ; Rothgerber, 2013), the 4 N Scale ( Piazza et al., 2015 ), Graca's
Meat Attachment Questionnaire ( Graça, Calheiros, & Oliveira, 2015 )
and Moral Disengagement in Meat Questionnaire ( Graça, Calheiros, &
Oliveira, 2016 ), and the Carnism Inventory ( Monteiro, Pfeiler,
Patterson, & Milburn, 2017 –seeRosenfeld (2018) for a more detailed
review of these ﬁve measures.
The MRCD framework formulates that the consonant cognitions that
these scales identify can be grouped into three categories: those focused
on animals themselves as entities separate from meat; those focused on
meat itself; and those focused on denying responsibility for eating meat.
From a dissonance perspective, endorsement of these justi ﬁcation
scales
helps individuals feel better about eating meat and reduces guilt overdoing so, hence facilitating greater consumption ( Piazza, in press ).
These perceptions allow individuals to act on a moral imperative andmaintain their view of themselves as moral actors who do not inﬂ ict
harm on others ( Bandura, 1999).
3.1. Animal based reduction: denial of animal mind and dichotomization
Aﬁrst set of MRCD prevention strategies are proposed to focus on
the denigration of consumed animals. Individuals who trample over the
rights of others often do so be degrading their victims as unworthy of
proper regard ( Bandura, 1990; 1999). Dissonance theory suggests that
the more people hurt others, the more they vilify their victims in orderto maintain their own self-justi ﬁcation, and the more they are resistant
to evidence that what they have done is wrong. Sykes and Matza (1957)
describe a process in which the transgressor neutralizes moral indig-nation at the self by denying the humanity of the victim and main-
taining that the injury is not really an injury at all. To the extent that
targets are not capable of su ﬀering, judgments that moral harm has
been committed against them diminish ( Gray, Young, & Waytz, 2012 ).
More speci ﬁc to eating meat, Serpell (1986) notes that individualsdistort facts about farm animals so that their death seems appropriate,necessary or deserved. For example, the fact that pigs survive and seem
outwardly healthy despite the inhumane living conditions they endure
leads individuals to conclude that they are debased, insensitive crea-
tures unworthy of moral concern. Serpell (1986) attributes this ten-
dency to view farm animals as objects rather than subjects as the pri-mary reason why livestock producers are resistant to humane reforms
even when these changes could be implemented without substantially
increasing cost. The present framework proposes that one technique,
therefore, to reduce MRCD is to deny animal mind ; that is, by claiming
that animals do not think, feel, and su ﬀer the same way as humans do,
meat eaters reduce the aversive arousal brought on by eating them. In
this view, beliefs about animals are strategically malleable to suit an
individual's motivational needs.
This argument has been directly supported by several experiments
demonstrating that when MRCD is triggered by some seemingly trivial
psychological manipulation, individuals will reduce dissonance per-
ceptually by denigrating animals, which is frequently the option pro-
vided for them. Bastian, Loughnan, and colleagues have found that
eating meat during an experiment ( Loughnan et al., 2010), being re-
minded of a link between meat and animal su ﬀering, being expected to
consume an animal in the imminent future, and judging animals rated
as more appropriate to eat ( Bastian et al., 2012) all led participants to
perceive animals as less capable of experiencing sensations (e.g.,hunger, pleasure, pain, etc.) and intellectual states (e.g., thinking,
planning, imagining, etc.). When dissonance was triggered by breaking
the dissociation between animal and meat, French participants attrib-
uted less mind to cows ( Tian, Hilton, & Becker, 2016 ); in Rothgerber
(2014a) , the trigger was exposure to unimpeachable vegetarians, and it
produced a similar lowering of perceived animal capacity.
These experimental studies reinforce work demonstrating that meat
eaters perceive less human-animal similarity ( Bilewicz, Imho ﬀ,&
Drogosz, 2011 ) and believe animals to possess lower mental capacities
than do vegetarians ( Ang, Chan, & Singh, 2019 ). They are also sup-
ported by recent work showing that the more meat eaters experience
ambivalence toward meat, the more likely they are to downplay theability
of animals to possess emotional and intellectual states ( Buttlar &
Walther, 2018 ). Similarly, greater meat consumption is related to
stronger beliefs that animals do not su ﬀer and experience pain the same
way as humans ( Monteiro et al., 2017 ;Rothgerber, 2013). Together,
these strategic perceptions help eliminate aversive consequences for
behavior and thus, help participants resolve the con ﬂict between eating
animals and concern for their welfare; in Bandura ’s (1999) terminology,
they help individuals achieve moral disengagement through deni-
grating the victim. When this process is disrupted and individuals think
about psychological attributes of animals, especially their intelligence,
they report greater disgust at the thought of eating them ( Ruby &
Heine, 2012 ).
Another strategy to reduce dissonance proposed by the MRCD fra-
mework involves a more subtle form of debasement that allows in-dividuals to maintain positive connections with selected animals while
justifying consuming others. Dichotomizing animals into those we love
and those we eat explains all sorts of inconsistencies in the way animalsare treated (see Herzog, 2010; Joy, 2011 ) and helps account for why
Americans express outrage at dogs being eaten in some cultures whilesimultaneously disregarding the moral worth of chickens, cows, pigs,
and other frequently consumed animals in their own. This selective
application of the moral sphere to certain animals but not others is
found in other cultures and in some cases, even within the same species.
The native inhabitants of Polynesia, for example, become attached to
pet dogs that are exempt from slaughter but remain detached from dogs
that are to be eaten ( Serpell, 1986). Recent evidence suggests that the
aforementioned denial of animal mind among meat eaters only appliesto animals that individuals consume. That is, the objects of consump-
tion are denigrated but animals that serve human needs as pets are not
perceived to have lower mental capacities ( Ang et al., 2019 ).H. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
6Subtly creating di ﬀerent categories of animals based on human
eating behavior appears to be a key mechanism to facilitate meat
consumption in children. Stewart and Cole (2009) argued that all re-
presentations of nonhuman animals are deﬁ ned according to their
usefulness to humans and propose two independent dimensions by
which humans deﬁ ne animals: in terms of their visibility and how ob-
jectiﬁed they are. The most privileged status is attached to pets who are
both highly visible and treated as subjects with whom children form a
close relationship. On the opposite extreme lie farmed animals, who are
nearly invisible and who are objecti ﬁed. To support the invisibility
notion, Plous (1993) reported that only 3% of stu ﬀed animal varieties
from a major manufacturer were commonly eaten animals, i.e., cows,
pigs, or chickens. Of the thirty-four stu ﬀed animals o ﬀered by a large
retail toy catalogue in the U.S., none featured a cow, pig, or chicken.Anderson & Henderson (2005) noted that in the majority of children's
stories, there is a separation between consumed animals such aschickens, sheep, cows, and pigs, which are largely invisible and treated
as replaceable commodities, and domesticated animals and pets, which
become humanized. Stewart and Cole (2009) speciﬁed several story and
communication techniques that blur the boundary between humansand these latter animals, thereby elevating our sympathy and fondness
for them. Cruelty to domesticated animals is scorned, teaching children
that while it is wrong to harm certain animals, it is simultaneously
acceptable to eat others ( Paul, 1996).
3.2. Meat-based reduction: meat as natural, normal, and nice
The aforementioned strategies focus on the animal that constitutes
the meat, but meat is an entity onto itself as well. The current frame-
work proposes that some justi ﬁcations do not focus exclusively on
farmed animals and their derogation, but instead center on an under-standing of meat itself with or without a recognition of the animals
involved. These strategies generally direct attention to meat consump-
tion, rather than meat production. One pro-meat justi ﬁcation is the
claim that eating meat is natural . This rationalization focuses on human
relationships with animals and depicts the relationship, whether it be
through religious or evolutionary forces, as one characterized by human
dominance and animal subordination (see Piazza et al., 2015;
Rothgerber, 2013). Appeals to biology, biological hierarchy, naturalselection, human evolution, and to God him/herself represent abstrac-
tions that intellectually distance individuals from their eating habits. By
focusing on human's standing in relation to animals, it is speculated that
the meat eater is excused for outcomes that would otherwise be ob-
jectionable; animal su ﬀering is rendered irrelevant, as a cost to the
expression of being human. Indeed, greater endorsement that it isnatural to eat meat is related to greater meat consumption, less in-
clination to change eating habits, and less willingness to try meat
substitution products ( Graça, Calheiros, & Oliveira, 2015; Piazza et al.,
2015 ;Rothgerber, 2013 ).
The MRCD framework suggests that there is also a pro-meat justi-
ﬁcation that derives an understanding of what it means to be human not
from abstract theories of biology or religion but from considering the
behavior of others, in this case what most others seem to be doing. Not
speciﬁc to MRCD, social support acts as a consonant cognition
(McKimmie et al., 2003 ;Stroebe
& Diehl, 1981). That is, having
someone else also commit a problematic behavior lessens the need to
reduce dissonance through attitude change ( Stroebe & Diehl, 1981 ),
provided the behavioral support came from someone who shared asalient ingroup membership ( McKimmie et al., 2003 ). The self-stan-
dards model of dissonance ( Stone & Cooper, 2001 ) posits that people
deﬁne what constitutes unwanted and therefore dissonance-provoking
behavior by referencing commonly and consensually agreed bench-
marks ( Cooper, 2007). Dissonance only occurs when an event contra-
dicts culturally shared norms. It is proposed, therefore, that MRCD islessened to the extent that meat eating is rationalized as a normal
human activity, a deeply-ingrained habitual behavior that largelytranscends culture. This social proof version of dissonance-reduction
appeals to dominant societal norms and attempts to placate guilt by
social reassurance. Because it is culturally acceptable to eat meat, the
individual is speculated to feel less aversive arousal even when made
aware of how their eating behavior may contradict a belief or lead to
harmful consequences. In support of this argument, greater endorse-
ment of meat as normal led to less guilt about eating meat and less drive
to restrict meat from diet ( Piazza et al., 2015 ).
A third pro-meat justi ﬁcation is speculated to emphasize gustation
and that meat is simply too delicious, or nice, to avoid. Endorsement of
such hedonic sentiments has been shown to be positively related tomeat consumption, to great commitment to maintain eating meat, and
to less guilt over doing so ( Piazza et al., 2015 ;Rothgerber, 2013).
Fondness for the taste and sensory qualities of meat may seem like aweak moral defense, but it is proposed that individuals convince
themselves that the personal pleasure from eating meat makes its pro-
blematic nature more tolerable. The importance placed upon the taste
of meat and how ful ﬁlling and satisfying it is can be seen as drawing
social identity boundaries between meat eaters and abstainers. Vege-tarians frequently display revulsion and disgust toward meat, especially
its sensory characteristics such as taste and smell ( Barr & Chapman,
2002 ;Beardsworth & Keil, 1992 ;Kenyon & Barker, 1998). Even more,
what distinguished strict vegetarians from similar groups –con-
scientious omnivores and semi-vegetarians –was the degree to which
the former was disgusted by meat and disliked its sensory character-
istics ( Rothgerber, 2014b, 2015b). Attesting to the importance of taste,
in several studies participants perceived taste to be the biggest barrierto reduce meat consumption and adopt a vegetarian diet ( Lea &
Worsley, 2001; Pohjolainen, Vannari, & Jokinen, 2015 ).
3.3. Denial of responsibility: meat as necessary, third party blame, and
moral outrage
It is possible that individuals may view meat as involving animals
that experience pain and have capacity and eschew pro-meat justi ﬁ-
cations for meat consumption, yet still not experience MRCD by de-
nying their responsibility in the matter. Early in dissonance theory it
was discovered that lacking the freedom to avoid a dissonant act would
serve as an important consonant cognition ( Linder, Cooper, & Jones,
1967 ), and the new look dissonance also incorporates this as it posits
that the individual must feel personally responsible for bringing about
the aversive event if dissonance is to occur ( Cooper & Fazio, 1984).
Without responsibility, disapproval of self or others is sharply reducedas
a restraining in ﬂuence ( Sykes & Matza, 1957).
The MRCD framework posits that one way to deny responsibility is
to perceive oneself as having no choice in the matter because of beliefs
that meat is necessary for good health . This may explain why meat eaters
strongly believe that it is unhealthy to forego meat consumption andwhy the more this view is endorsed, the more individuals reported
eating meat ( Piazza et al., 2015 ;Rothgerber, 2013 ). By convincing
themselves that meat is necessary for survival, the individual does notfeel responsible for harming animals. Meat as necessary is one of the
4 N's of meat justi ﬁcation ( Piazza et al., 2015 ) and its endorsement has
also been correlated with lower drive to restrict animal products fromdiet, greater commitment to eating meat, and less guilt about animal-
product decisions ( Piazza et al., 2015 ).
Beyond convincing oneself that eating meat is not a choice at all, the
framework also suggests that individuals may obscure personal re-
sponsibility for the mistreatment of farmed animals by minimizing their
own in ﬂuence and blaming other entities in the food system. Consumers
generally claim that they are powerless to improve animal welfare
standards ( Harper & Henson, 2001 ), with majorities in a European
sample believing that their voice matters little ( Mayﬁeld et al., 2007).
Majorities also indicate that they would like more information about
the treatment of farm animals when making purchasing decisions
(European Commission, 2006 ;Harper & Henson, 2001 ), which in partH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
7seems a self-protective claim to reduce dissonance because individuals
avoid such information when made available ( Harper & Henson, 2001 ).
Only a small minority believe that farm animal welfare is primarily amatter for consumers ( European Commission, 2006 ). Responsibility is
instead abrogated to other agents, such as governments ( Harper &
Henson, 2001; Miele, 2010, pp. 1– 16;Te Velde et al., 2002) for failing
to implement su ﬃcient and e ﬀective laws and to retailers for failing to
oﬀer humanely produced meat ( Miele, 2010 , pp. 1– 16;Te Velde et al.,
2002 ). This third party blame or“shifting the blame ”(Serpell, 1986 )i s
an age-old device to distance individuals from the killing of animals and
place responsibility elsewhere. In New Guinea, for example, a division
of labor allows women to care for and nurture pigs and remain
blameless for their death, a task which befalls the men who have no
prior relationship with the animals. In many industrialized societies, a
division of labor within animal farming (e.g, breeder, growing to
slaughter weight, transport to slaughter, etc.) allows each farmer to
evade the full burden of responsibility ( Serpell, 1986 ).
At times, the framework speculates that individuals may also ex-
press moral outrage at third party transgressors in the food system or
even at others who mistreat animals outside the food context as a wayto reduce MRCD. Such moral outrage has been shown in part to be
motivated by an e ﬀort to assuage personal guilt and cast dispersions on
others ( Rothschild & Keefer, 2017 ). For example, Rothschild, Landau,
Sullivan, and Keefer (2012) found that reminders of participants' own
environmentally destructive behavior increased their willingness toblame corporations for harming the environment. A ﬃrming partici-
pants' moral identity in an unrelated context eliminated this guilt-driven blame. The opportunity to express outrage reduced guilt and
restored perceived personal morality ( Rothschild & Keefer, 2017 ). This
suggests that individuals may express defensive outrage over thetreatment of farmed animals in part to restore a moral identity, in this
case reducing MRCD by convincing oneself that their eating behavior is
regrettable, but not really under their control. This is related to thephenomenon of distancing, a way of coping with ethical dissonance by
hiding one's own moral violation while pointing to other people's moral
failings ( Barkan et al., 2015 ).
As shown in Fig. 1, the current framework proposes that when in-
dividuals reduce MRCD through perceptual distortions about meat and
animals, these justi ﬁcations become practiced and more accessible, thus
strengthening individuals ’commitment to and belief in them. It is
speculated that such justi ﬁcations allow individuals to continue con-
suming meat with less guilt or aversive arousal. What may be less ap-parent is the suggestion that activating and elaborating on these justi-
ﬁcations for eating meat likely causes individuals to increase their meat
consumption. Essentially, by reassuring themselves that eating meat is
morally justi ﬁable,
 the behavior becomes more attractive. In essence,
the MRCD framework proposes that experiencing MRCD is double-edged: It may lead some to assuage guilt by abandoning meat con-
sumption, but for many others, it will increase meat consumption
through the formulation and strengthening of justi ﬁcations.
Although increasing attention is being paid to delineate and ex-
pound upon the strategies by which meat eaters prevent and reduce
MRCD, research is less informative about the relative popularity of each
of these dissonance prevention and reducing mechanisms and about
specifying upon what this popularity depends. Most often, investigators
will only make available one means of reducing MRCD (but see Tian
et al., 2016), preventing conclusions about whether participants wouldhave chosen that means of dissonance reduction if others had been
available. Given the importance of which mechanisms meat eaters
employ to negotiate MRCD, the next section sets out to identity some
factors that may predict these choices and generates predictions
awaiting further tests.4. Predicting the MRCD prevention/reducing mechanisms
4.1. The aspect of meat eating that produces MRCD
In keeping with the attention given to the meat paradox, the
manuscript has focused on concerns that eating meat is harmful to
animals, but MRCD may also originate from reminders that eating meat
is harmful to the planet or to personal well-being. Some individuals
may be more susceptible to one form given their unique values and
priorities, and the context itself may encourage one form of MRDC to be
activated, as would occur if a publicized study found meat to be
harmful to health, or a new report cited meat as a major contributor to
climate change. That said, consistent with the current emphasis, there is
reason to believe that MRCD is most likely to emerge with concerns
related to animal welfare. For example, environmental science graduate
students in the Czech Republic were more likely to cite animal welfare
concerns as problematic for meat consumption than environmental
concerns, even though the latter was their area of study and they were
knowledgeable about meat's danger to the environment ( Šedová,
Slovák, & Je žková, 2016 ). To speculate, perhaps MRCD seems strongly
tied to animal harm because this link is most obvious and visible, while
feeling guilty about eating meat because of environmental or personal
health concerns may be based on more remote factors and may require
greater knowledge. One hypothesis is that MRCD based on threats to
personal health may be the least common, as one dissonance-reducing
mechanism is the previously noted widespread belief that animal pro-
tein is necessary to promote good health.
This distinction about what issue directs MRCD has typically been
ignored as investigators of the meat paradox have focused on un-
pleasantries related to animals. But centrally, the framework empha-
sizes that how individuals reduce MRCD depends on what is salient in
theﬁrst place. When environmental and personal health concerns
compel MRCD, mechanisms related to animals –denial of animal mind,
dichotomization, and dissociation –are hypothesized to disappear as
motivated cognitions and prevention tactics. In general, one could
speculate that concerns over personal health may be likely to be pre-
vented by perceiving oneself as restricting meat intake and strategically
avoiding information linking meat eating with negative health out-
comes and reduced by justifying meat as necessary for health and by
emphasizing other healthy behaviors one practices. Environmentally-
activated MRCD may be speculated to be prevented by perceiving
oneself as restricting meat intake, strategically avoiding information
liking meat with negative environmental outcomes, and derogating
vegetarians who pose a moral threat, and reduced by denying respon-
sibility. In part, which mechanism is preferred is hypothesized to de-
pend on the speci ﬁc motivation created by MRCD. The next section
discusses the impact of motivation for the prototypical cases of MRCD,those involving concern for animal welfare.
4.2. The motivation created by MRCD
MRCD –like other forms of dissonance –seems to involve arousal,
as anticipating moral reproach from vegetarians increased negative
emotions ( Rothgerber, 2014a ) and thinking about the intelligence of
lamb along with typical conditions of its life, death, and processingincreased negative a ﬀect in women ( Dowsett, Semmler, Bray, Ankeny,
& Chur-Hansen, 2018 ). There are various motivations that may cause
the arousal state associated with MRCD, a source of theoretical con-
tention for CDT historically. The current framework proposes that what
motivates MRCD is important because it helps determines how it is
resolved.
Next,
I consider the versions of dissonance theory that seem to have
the most relevance for MRCD and hypothesize on di ﬀerent MRCD
prevention and reduction mechanisms most likely to be associated witheach. This entire section should be viewed as speculative because to
date, there has been little, if any, research on what type of dissonanceH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
8motivation is associated with MRCD.
Inconsistency. Classical dissonance theory ( Festinger, 1957) posits
that cognitive dissonance occurs when an individual believes that two
of their cognitions (beliefs, opinions, attitudes, perceptions, or knowl-
edges about persons, objects, issues, and so forth) are inconsistent with
each other. Most often the inconsistency results from discrepancies
between what people think (i.e., attitudes, beliefs, etc.) and what
people do (i.e., behaviors). From this perspective, MRCD could arise
from knowledge that “I eat meat, ”which is incongruent with the re-
cognition that “I don't like to hurt animals. ”The more discrepant the
cognitions, and the more they matter to the individual, the greater the
magnitude of dissonance. Formally, dissonance magnitude can be de-
ﬁned as the SUM (all discrepant cognitions x importance)/SUM (all
consonant cognitions x importance). If meat eating is the troublingbehavior, then consonant cognitions would involve motivated percep-
tions that are consistent with or help explain away eating meat.
InFestinger's (1957) original version of CDT, all the reviewed pre-
vention and reduction strategies would be hypothesized to alleviate the
cognitive dissonance state because they all (a) serve to help avoid
thinking about eating meat or animal welfare (i.e., the prevention
strategies), (b) qualify as consonant cognitions (i.e., the strategic per-
ceptions to reduce MRCD), or (c) reduce discrepant cognitions (i.e.,
behavioral change). While certain individual di ﬀerences may bias
people toward one strategy over another, they should all be attractivebecause they reduce the magnitude of dissonance, noting that people
generally prefer perceptual to behavioral change.
Responsibility based revisions. According to the New Look model
of dissonance ( Cooper & Fazio, 1984 ), the cognitive dissonance state
occurs when a behavior produces aversive consequences individualswant to avoid ( Cooper & Worchel, 1970 ;Goethals & Cooper, 1972 ) for
which they feel personally responsible ( Beauvois & Joule, 1981 ). Per-
ceived personal responsibility is absolved if individuals believe they
had no choice in committing the behavior ( Linder et al., 1967 ) and/or
the consequence was unforeseeable when they made that choice
(Cooper, 1971 ). From this perspective, MRCD would arise from
knowledge that “I eat meat ”along with a belief that “eating meat harms
animals, ”provided the individual perceives themselves to have made
the choice to eat meat freely and that they could have known it washarmful to animals when they decided to eat meat. The responsibility
revisions focus on rationalizing the behavior through a change in atti-
tudes as the primary way to reduce cognitive dissonance state. Attitude
change here is not motivated to restore consistency, but to render the
consequences of behavior non-aversive.
If MRCD occurs because an individuals ’eating behavior produces
aversive consequences they wish to avoid and for which they feel
personally responsible, then the goal of dissonance reduction is to
convince individuals that the consequences of their behavior are non-
aversive or that they are not responsible for their behavior. One pri-
mary option, therefore, is hypothesized to involve trivializing the
consequences of eating meat by denying mind capacity to animals. If
animals cannot su ﬀer the same way as humans and their perceived
capacity is diminished, then the animal welfare consequences of eatingmeat seem negligible. Of course, it may also be possible to deny that
individuals are causing harmful consequences to animals by preventive
strategies such as avoiding thinking about animal welfare, willfully
remaining ignorant of it, dissociating meat from the animal, and pre-
serving the illusion that they are not really eating that much meat.
Denying personal responsibility is also hypothesized to be achieved by
claims that meat is necessary for good health, and by expressing moral
outrage at other implicated constituencies in the food production pro-
cess, such as governments, farmers, and retailers for not curtailingabuses
against animals.
Self-based revisions. Some revisions of CDT emphasize the e ﬀect
of threats to self-integrity in activating negative arousal. According to
self-based modi ﬁcations, the cognitive dissonance state occurs when an
individual's behavior is inconsistent with their self-concept (self-consistency; Aronson, 1968), or when it threatens their sense of self as
worthy, morally rectitude, or competent (self-a ﬃrmation; Steele,
1988 ). From these accounts, MRCD may arise from the knowledge that
“I eat meat, ”along with a belief that “compassionate people don't hurt
animals. ”Both these approaches connect dissonance reduction to re-
storing an individual's threatened self-conception although there is an
important distinction between them.
In the self-consistency view, the restoration must be targeted at the
speciﬁc inconsistency producing the cognitive dissonance state.
Individuals may decide, for example that they are not moral or com-petent for eating animals, but more likely they would seek to change
other attitudes or relevant cognitions about animals or meat to feel
more worthy. In the self-a ﬃrmation view, anything that rea ﬃrms the
integrity of the self, even if it does not directly resolve the incon-sistency, will reduce the cognitive dissonance state. An even more in-
clusive perspective on CDT is the Meaning Maintenance Model ( Proulx,
Inzlicht, & Harmon-Jones, 2012), which outlines that the cognitivedissonance state does not require a self-threat and could be reduced by
any process that reduces the arousal if not the inconsistency. This view
suggests that dissonance reduction can occur by means unrelated to the
inconsistency, such as regaining control, looking for rules, or a ﬃrming
familiar values and beliefs.
If self-consistency is implicated, restoring a threatened sense of self
in the face of MRCD may be accomplished by perceptually emphasizingthat one does nice things for (non-consumed) animals –a process re-
lying on dichotomization, that one is morally outraged by the immoralactions of others, and that one is o ﬀended by vegetarians and their
claims of moral superiority. While these perceptions all help the in-dividual feel better about themselves by focusing attention speci ﬁcally
on eating meat, self-a ﬃrmation accounts (and even more broadly, the
meaning maintenance model) would also emphasize that individuals
may consider any good actions that they do, even behavior unrelated to
eating meat itself, an example of what Barkan et al. (2015) term moral
licensing. Whether self-consistency or self-a ﬃrmation is involved,
prevention mechanisms such as avoidance, willful ignorance, and dis-sociation would also help protect the self from recognition that the
individual is doing something unworthy and immoral when eating
meat.
4.3. Individual di ﬀerences
While the popularity of MRCD prevention and reducing mechanisms
may depend on somewhat context-driven factors such as the aspect
producing MRCD and the motivation created by it, the use of these
mechanisms is also speculated to be connected to more enduring in-
dividual di ﬀerences. The individual di ﬀerence approach has received
some attention in the meat eating literature, as there has been recentinterest in identifying di ﬀerent types of meat eaters (see Graça et al.,
2015 ;Onwezen
& van der Weele, 2016), in part because of the logic of
segmentation, the idea that di ﬀerent groups of people will be more or
less persuaded by di ﬀerent messages. These types of analyses di ﬀer in
what factors di ﬀerentiate between di ﬀerent types of meat eaters, but
most place individuals on a continuum from more meat attachment toless. The present framework would predict that those more attached to
meat derive more value from it and would be more likely to reduce
MRCD perceptually through motivated cognitions. Those less attached
to meat derive less satisfaction from meat and should rely on preventive
strategies to reduce MRCD, and if those fail, would be predicted to be
more likely to embrace behavioral change than those more committed
to meat. Below are a few individual di ﬀerences that may impact how
MRCD is handled, along with relevant research.
Gender. There is reason to suspect that gender is an important
predictor of an individual's proclivity to adopt a particular technique to
reduce MRCD. A number of studies have found that gender is the single
biggest predictor of attitudes toward animals and consumption of ani-
mals (e.g., Gossard & York, 2003 ;Kellert & Berry, 1987 ;Vollum,H. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
9Buﬃngton-Vollum, & Longmire, 2004 ). Women form stronger emo-
tional attachments to pets, revealed greater anthropomorphic feelings
toward animals, are more concerned about the su ﬀering of lab animals,
favor more the animal protection movement, and favor increased re-strictions on animal use ( Broida, Tingley, Kimball, & Miele, 1993;
Eldridge & Gluck, 1996 ;Kellert & Berry, 1987; Knight, Vrij, Cherryman,
& Nunkoosing, 2004 ). In contrast, Kellert and Berry (1987) found that
men expressed stronger support for utilitarian and dominionistic atti-tudes toward animals. The former is indicated by a willingness to agree
with the exploitation of animals while the latter is related to deriving
personal pleasure from achieving control over animals.
Perhaps not surprisingly, these gender di ﬀerences in attitudes to-
ward living animals a ﬀect attitudes and behavior toward meat. Women
expressed more disgust and negative attitudes toward eating meat thanmen ( Kubberod et al., 2002a ,2002b) and reported eating less meat
across samples from di ﬀerent nationalities ( Allen, Wilson, Ng, & Dunne,
2000 ;Kubberod et al., 2002a ;Prättälä et al., 2006 ;Rozin, Hormes,
Faith, & Wansink, 2012 ;Santos & Booth, 1996 ). Among ﬂexitarians,
gender predicted openness to going vegetarian, even beyond identity,
motivational, or social contextual factors ( Rosenfeld, Rothgerber, &
Tomiyama, 2019 ). Additionally, a number of researchers have dis-
covered that a greater percent of women report being vegetarian (e.g,
Cramer et al., 2017; Forestell & Nezlek, 2018; Kalof, Dietz, Stern, &
Guagnano, 1999 ); attesting to the strength of the e ﬀect, gender (fe-
maleness) was the single biggest predictor of vegetarianism in a large-
scale American database ( Gossard & York, 2003 ).
One of the reasons that women are more likely to disavow meat is
that animal ﬂesh is associated with power, dominance, and masculinity,
attributes embraced by men ( Adams, 1990; Allen & Hung Ng, 2003; Lea
& Worsley, 2001; Rothgerber, 2013 ). When the values symbolized by a
product are incongruent with personal values, individuals like the tasteof the product less and have less favorable attitudes and behavioral
intent to purchase the product ( Allen, Gupta, & Monnier, 2008 ). The
importance of value di ﬀerences in a ﬀecting the evaluation of meat was
conﬁrmed in one study revealing that gender di ﬀerences in vegetar-
ianism
disappeared after controlling for di ﬀerences in values and beliefs
(Kalof et al., 1999).
Because of their greater a ﬀection and compassion toward animals
and greater distancing from meat and the values it represents, womendisplay di ﬀerent ways of handling the contradictions instigated by meat
consumption than men. In contrast to men who relish opportunities todisplay mastery over animals, women ﬁnd it more di ﬃcult to justify
eating animals, giving less endorsement to justi ﬁcation strategies that
reduce MRCD ( Rothgerber, 2013 ). Women prefer “look-the-other-way ”
strategies that prevent MRCD by dissociating the animal from the foodon their plate and by avoiding thinking about how the animal was
treated before arriving to the plate ( Rothgerber, 2013). They also de-
liberately underreport their meat consumption when the context leadsthem to anticipate MRCD ( Rothgerber, 2019b ). Men, on the other hand,
are less apologetic and uncomfortable eating meat. They prefer to re-duce MRCD by endorsing pro-meat justi ﬁcations ( Piazza et al., 2015;
Rothgerber, 2013 ) and by denying animal mind ( Rothgerber, 2013 ).
Values . As noted, men and women di ﬀer in how they negotiate
MRCD largely because they hold di ﬀerent values. Independent of
gender, values have been shown to in ﬂuence attitudes toward animals
and meat. Relative to meat eaters, vegetarians reject social power, so-cial dominance, inequality, and authoritarianism ( Allen et al., 2000,
2008 ;Bilewicz et al., 2011 ;Kalof et al., 1999). This seems logical given
that meat symbolizes these attributes and that plant-derived foods re-
present a rejection of these values ( Adams, 1990 ;Allen et al., 2008;
Allen & Hung Ng, 2003 ;Lea & Worsley, 2001 ). Individuals who endorse
ideologies such as right-wing authoritarianism and social dominance
orientation (SDO) are more likely to justify the exploitation of other
species, tolerate animal cruelty, and report high levels of meat con-
sumption ( Dhont & Hodson, 2014 ;Dhont, Hodson, Costello, &
MacInnis, 2014 ;Dhont, Hodson, & Leite, 2016 ). Even after controllingfor SDO, political conservatives hold more negative animal welfareattitudes, o ﬀer less support for animal welfare, and harbor greater
speciesism than liberals ( Hoﬀarth et al., in press; Smith, Marsden, &
Kim, 2017 ). Because of these documented di ﬀerences,
even though
there is no data comparing liberals and conservatives in how they re-spond to MRCD, the framework hypothesizes that conservatives would
behave more like men and would embrace direct, unapologetic justi ﬁ-
cations for eating meat such as denying animal mind and espousing pro-meat justi ﬁcations; liberals, who hold greater sympathies toward an-
imal welfare would be hypothesized to be more motivated to preventMRCD from occurring in the ﬁrst place, adopting similar mechanisms as
employed by women and would be more adverse to handling MRCDperceptually, opting instead to curtail meat consumption.
Aﬀection toward animals and toward meat . From a dissonance
perspective, two types of meat-eaters stand to experience the most
tension when confronted with reminders that their eating behavior is
harmful to animal welfare: those that love animals the most and those
that love meat the most. Meat eaters with particular a ﬀection toward
animals would likely perceive MRCD to be especially troubling, as ei-ther the inconsistency would be di ﬃcult to ignore, the aversive con-
sequences of their eating behavior perceived as large, or the violation ofself-standards poignant. The framework would speculate that similar to
women and liberals, such individuals would likely ﬁnd many of the
MRCD reduction strategies unappealing, especially denying animalmind and pro-meat justi ﬁcations, and thus, attempts would be made to
prevent MRCD from ever occurring. Those loving the taste of meatwould be predicted to be pulled in a di ﬀerent direction. For such in-
dividuals, the value gained in eating meat is large, and therefore, suchindividuals would likely be highly motivated to engage in motivated
psychological distortions about animals and meat to maintain the de-
sired behavior.
Exposure to farm animals .Serpell (1986) notes that although
farmers, livestock herders, and hunters all exert dominion over animals,the former groups have a vested interest in identifying the individual
temperament, moods, and other characteristics of each animal under
their care. Farmers become acquainted with individual animals and
may become attached to them; thus, the eventual deliberate inﬂ iction of
suﬀering on these animals produces greater guilt. Because of the bond
between farmer and animal that Serpell (1986) describes, the frame-
work would predict that farmers would be unlikely to reduce theirMRCD by denying animal mind; after all, it promotes their livelihood
and well-being to distinguish between the animals they raise. Support
for this prediction was recently attained by Peden et al. (in press) , who
found no evidence that pig farmers denigrated the capacities of pigs toexperience various emotional states. Others working in the food pro-
duction process, whether it be in the slaughterhouse or the chef's
kitchen, may experience large amounts of MRCD but lack the intimacy
with animals experienced by farmers. These groups would likely score
high on strategic perceptions to reduce MRCD although this remains
untested.
4.4. Culture
The experience of cognitive dissonance is not only shaped by in-
dividual di ﬀerence factors but also by cultural heritage. An examination
of how and whether cognitive dissonance is manifested in di ﬀerent
cultures is a relatively recent addition to mainstream cognitive dis-
sonance work, and it has been given little attention in relation to
MRCD. After some controversy, cognitive dissonance is now understood
to potentially a ﬀect anyone, but what activates dissonance varies by
culture (see Cooper, 2007 ;Hoshino-Browne et al., 2005; Kitayama,
Snibbe, Markus, & Suzuki, 2004 ). Of speci ﬁc relevance to MRCD, there
is considerable diversity across cultures in the extent to which it is
considered
acceptable to exploit and harm certain animal species ( Joy,
2011 ). More generally, to the extent that MRCD involves considering
one's behavior and discovering that it falls short of personal orH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
10normative standards, and that culture a ﬀects these standards, the
MRCD framework proposes that MRCD will be experienced di ﬀerently
depending on cultural background.
There is tentative support for this general hypothesis. Tian et al.
(2016) examined whether French and Chinese participants would show
evidence of dissonance reduction following conditions designed to
heighten MRCD. Following exposure to visual stimuli making the an-
imal origin of meat explicit, French but not Chinese participants rated
cows as being lower in agency-related mental states. These dissociation-
disrupting conditions led participants, without distinction of national
origin, to express less willingness to eat beef in two studies. Partici-
pants ’cultural origins predicted their reactions to the study, at least in
terms of beliefs about animal mind; the trouble lies in explicating whataccounts for the detected e ﬀects.
One possibility is that French participants were more sensitive to
MRCD in general, because as Tian et al. (2016) note, eating behavior
may be tied more to their self-concept than for Chinese participants. Asecond possibility is that cultures may not di ﬀer in general suscept-
ibility to MRCD but that what speci ﬁcally triggers MRCD may di ﬀer
culturally. Because food production is more hidden in France than
China, it may have evoked greater dissonance in the French sample
(Tian et al., 2016 ). That cultures may di ﬀer in their sensitivity to dis-
sociation has been shown in other studies ( Kunst & Haugestad, 2018;
Mayﬁeld et al., 2007). For example, Mayﬁeld et al. (2007) found that
the majority of Swedes were not bothered by thinking of the animalorigin of meat when eating it, that British consumers were ambivalent
about it, and that Italians were more polarized in their reactions to
undoing dissociation. Kunst and Haugestad (2018) claim that the po-
tency of the dissociation mechanism seems to depend on how ac-customed consumers in a country are to viewing unprocessed meat, as
Ecuadorians were less impacted by seeing a pork roast with its head on
than were Americans. The cultural speci ﬁcity in activating MRCD has
also been shown in a study that found reminding consumers about
animal's psychological attributes led to more disgust in North America
(i.e., Canada or the US) than in Asia (i.e., China or India; Ruby & Heine,
2012 ). A third possibility for the results attained by Tian et al. (2016) is
that Chinese participants experienced as much MRCD as French parti-
cipants, but that they preferred to reduce it in a di ﬀerent manner.
Perhaps their greater familiarity with animals in the production processor other deeper cultural values made them feel more connected to an-
imals in a way that made them averse to denying animal mind.
Although much more empirical work is needed to explore how
MRCD is experienced, blunted, and reduced in di ﬀerent cultures, I
would speculate that a critical factor seems to be the extent to which itis considered culturally acceptable to exploit and harm certain animal
species. In addition, the following are posited to be a few likely mod-
erators: exposure to unprocessed meat; exposure to farm animals; the
treatment received by these farm animals; the way the culture re-
presents relationships with animals including pets; the importance of
taste; beliefs about personal responsibility; and beliefs about God and
human standing relative to animals. Each of these likely impacts the
overall MRCD experienced by a culture, what would trigger MRCD, and
preferred options to prevent and reduce MRCD.
Researchers, therefore, need to be very careful in interpreting cross-
cultural data on MRCD. Cultural di ﬀerences on some outcome could be
attributable to overall di ﬀerences in MRCD susceptibility, to di ﬀerences
in
the way that MRCD is activated within a culture, or to di ﬀerences in
the way that MRCD is prevented or reduced. Ideally, these di ﬀerences
would be systematically built into the study design and tested. Even a
nullﬁnding does not necessarily indicate equivalence. The lack of dif-
ference in willingness to eat beef between French and Chinese in Tian
et al. (2016) may indicate that both groups experienced similar
amounts of MRCD, but it could also result from one group experiencinghigher MRCD than the other combined with a lower desire to reduce
MRCD behaviorally.5. Implications of the MRCD framework
The present work has o ﬀered a framework for understanding how
meat eaters are able to dissipate negative arousal given that their eating
behavior has potentially negative consequences for animals, the en-
vironment and personal health. It has reviewed research examining
how MRCD is prevented and reduced and identi ﬁed factors that may
predict the popularity of these mechanisms, citing empirical evidencewhen available. This next section is more speculative and attempts to
outline several possible implications of the current framework.
Speciﬁcally, I examine the implications of the framework on reducing
meat consumption, on methodological factors a ﬀecting how to measure
MRCD reduction, on the importance of seeking behavioral commitment
ﬁrst, and on how MRCD is impacted by outside factors including the
price of meat, the prominence of plant-based substitutes, and the rise ofcampaigns to increase moral awareness of animal su ﬀering, suggesting
that each will likely lead some individuals to eat less meat but others toconsume even more of it.
5.1. Targeting MRCD prevention and reducing strategies
There are a variety of approaches to reducing societal meat con-
sumption, including levying pressure on institutions and organizations
to change policy and on the political system to seek changes to legis-
lation that subsidizes inexpensive meat. The current work concentrates
on the individual psychological level, and the current framework sug-
gests that it is advantageous to confront the strategic perceptions anddistortions that meat eaters endorse when their eating behavior is
threatened. That is, the MRCD framework implies that actors and sta-
keholders seeking to curtail meat consumption would bene ﬁt by chal-
lenging and delegitimizing the very mechanisms by which meat eaterswill bolster meat eating when they believe it be questioned.
Although this approach could conceivably target any motivated
cognition, such as pro-meat justi ﬁcations or denying responsibility, the
few published interventions seem to focus on the denigration of animalmechanism. For example, to interfere with the denial of animal mind,
Wang and Basso (2019) had participants read about a restaurant where
customers or the sta ﬀplayed with piglets or where there were re-
minders that pigs were similar to humans. Across several experiments,
individuals had less favorable attitudes toward pork, generated greater
guilt in thinking of consuming pork, and were less likely to buy and to
eat pork when they were induced to think about pigs in humanizing
terms. Although the treatment conditions disrupted the dissociating of
pigs from pork products, the comparison conditions did this as well.
What seems to make this intervention successful, therefore, is that an-
thropomorphisizing animals likely has the e ﬀect of undoing the denial
of animal mind. While meat eating is bolstered by minimizing theperceived mental and sensory experiences of animals, encouraging the
opposite thinking makes it harder to justify eating an animal who
would be perceived as more capable of pain and su ﬀering. Preventing
the denigration of farm animals o ﬀers promise, but there are still nu-
merous questions to explore such as how long these e ﬀects persist and
why these manipulations did not transfer to cows ( Wang & Basso,
2019 ).
Interventions may also target the mechanisms that allow meat ea-
ters to prevent experiencing MRCD in the ﬁrst place. When it comes to
attitudes
and behavior toward eating meat, individuals act very dif-
ferently as citizens than they do as customers ( Schröder & McEachern,
2004 ;Te Velde et al., 2002 ;Verbeke, Pérez-Cueto, de Barcellos,
Krystallis, & Grunert, 2010). As citizens, they value farmed animalwelfare, desire better treatment for animals, and want greater trans-
parency and assistance in making purchasing decisions ( Knight et al.,
2003 ;Miele, 2010, pp. 1– 16;Te Velde et al., 2002 ;Vanhonacker et al.,
2007 ). They may even vote in support of referendums mandating more
humane treatment of farmed animals. As consumers though, in-dividuals do not want to be reminded of the life and death of animals orH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
11their welfare when shopping ( Mayﬁeld et al., 2007; Miele, 2010 , pp.
1–16). They are able to divert their own attention away from the moral
consequences of their purchasing behavior at little psychological cost
(Hestermann, Le Yaouanq, & Treich, 2018 ).
This suggests a couple of actions. Ballot initiatives may not only
achieve favorable legislative outcomes, they may make animal welfare
salient to citizens –increasing their MRCD –and in turn, in ﬂuence their
behavior as consumers. For example, demand for free range eggs rosedramatically during the ballot period in which an initiative called for
reducing the con ﬁnement of farm animals ( Norwood & Lusk, 2011 ).
Another approach is to intentionally disrupt dissociation in the grocerystore, as Hoogland et al. (2005) achieved in ﬁnding that reminders of
the animal origin of meat led to a decrease in meat purchasing for someparticipants. Their manipulation cannot ordinarily be accomplished
without outside cooperation, but one may speculate that repeated re-
minders in other media may eventually a ﬀect the consciousness of
shoppers. Making salient that meat is derived from animals may also berealized by food labels on meat that could also reveal information about
farm animal treatment, potentially disrupting avoidance and willful
ignorance in the process. To force individuals to grapple with incon-
sistencies between their attitudes and values on the one hand and be-
havior on the other, the present framework would suggest that cam-
paigns attempt to increase awareness of the conditions under which
farm animals live and die. Such presentations potentially make it more
costly to maintain dishonest beliefs (see Hestermann, Le Yaouanq, &
Treich, 2018; Rabin, 1994) and force individuals to confront that their
eating behavior and sentiments toward animals are misaligned. They
also counter a phenomenon whereby meat eaters reject on moral
grounds many of the speci ﬁc practices involving animals they consume
(e.g., Miele, 2010, pp. 1– 16;Te Velde et al., 2002 ). Unchecked, these
expressions seemingly allow individuals to gain moral validation while
simultaneously eating meat, and their ignorance may allow them to
evade feelings of hypocrisy.
Together, these tactics would help make animal welfare stand out as
a primary ethical concern among consumers, and this transformationmay lead to purchasing patterns more consistent with people's ex-
pressed a ﬀection toward animals. Research on the ethical consumer
intention-behavior gap shows that even ethical consumers are quick torationalize unethical purchasing behavior ( Szmigin, Carrigan, &
McEachern, 2009), but that this changes for the one or two ethicalconcerns embedded into their shopping habits. Consuming in violation
of these primary ethical concerns creates cognitive dissonance, and
ethical consumers are in the process of integrating primary issues into
their shopping habits or have already embedded them into their routine
choices ( Carrington, Neville, & Whitwell, 2014 ).
The proposed framework also implies that there is utility in tar-
geting di ﬀerent MRCD strategies in di ﬀerent populations. In general,
the present work suggests that the intervention should correspond tothe MRCD prevention or reduction mechanism most likely embraced by
the target. When trying to reduce meat consumption among those
whose MRCD is motivated by, or is suspected of being motivated by a
concern over aversive consequences, the framework speculates that
appeals should proactively counter beliefs that farm animals lack ca-
pacity, that meat is necessary for good health, and that consumers play
no
responsibility in harming animals. In addition, it would suggest
exposing MRCD prevention mechanisms that enable individuals topretend that animals are not harmed when they consume meat. Among
those likely to experience MRCD because of concerns with self-viola-
tions, the framework o ﬀers that arguments should undermine dichot-
omization by emphasizing similarities between consumed and non-consumed animals and should remind individuals how eating meat
violates their notions of themselves, regardless of how much they ex-
press outrage at other transgressors, ridicule vegetarians, or think of
other positive actions they have committed.
When targeting women, those holding values encouraging empathy
toward animals, and those less attached to eating meat, the frameworksuggests that actors and stakeholders working to decrease meat con-
sumption should target prevention strategies, speci ﬁcally trying to re-
mind individuals that they consume regular amounts of meat derivedfrom an animal that is treated inhumanely. Increasing MRCD in this
population would be predicted to be more likely to lead to behavioral
change, as the cost of maintaining dishonest beliefs is potentially high,
and reduction strategies focused on denigrating animals would see-
mingly be distasteful.
When targeting men, those holding more conservative attitudes
discouraging empathy toward animals, and those more committed to
eating meat, the framework implies that triggering MRCD is likely to
backﬁre, as such individuals would likely respond with motivated
perceptions reducing the cognitive dissonance state, resulting in evengreater subsequent meat consumption. Trying to de ﬁne meat eating as
an immoral activity may, therefore, cause those favorable to it toconsume even more meat. Alternatively, one could venture that it may
be possible to take advantage of di ﬀerences between conservatives and
liberals in what domains of morality they value most. While liberalsendorse the harm/care and fairness/reciprocity domains more than
conservatives do, conservatives value purity/sanctity, among others,
more than do liberals ( Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009 ). Thus, while
emphasizing that eating meat is cruel and involves treating animalsunfairly may resonate with liberals, it likely would not with con-
servatives. To speculate, underscoring how contaminated and polluted
factory farmed animals are with antibiotics, hormones, unnatural feed,
and other toxins, and how the industry leads to a contaminated and
polluted physical environment may o ﬀer greater appeal to con-
servatives. Appealing to the purity/sanctity moral domain was suc-cessful in in ﬂuencing conservatives to hold more favorable attitudes
and support for policies on a related domain, protecting the physicalenvironment ( Feinberg & Willer, 2013 ). Another suggestion is to frame
social change messages about eating meat to conservatives as preser-ving, rather than replacing traditional culture and institutions. Theprotection of animal welfare could be framed as patriotic in that it
preserves traditional values and highlights the way in which the recent
industrial practice of factory farming is undesirable compared to older
farming practices ( Hoﬀarth et al., in press). In general, the framework
would predict that frames are more likely to succeed with those highlycommitted to eating meat to the extent that they match other values
held by such individuals and that they provoke as little MRCD as pos-
sible, lest the intervention potentially increase motivated justi ﬁcations
and subsequent meat eating.
5.2. Measuring dissonance reduction
The MRCD framework not only has implications for stakeholders
aiming to curtail meat consumption, it has relevance for academic re-
searchers seeking to understand how individuals make moral decisions
and rationalize potentially problematic behavior. The framework
makes it clear that individuals have wide latitude in how they reduce
MRCD and also o ﬀers an initial step in outlining factors a ﬀecting the
popularity of these mechanisms. Unfortunately, research activatingMRCD has not allowed participants to express their most preferred
choice of dissonance reducing mechanism by generating their own re-
sponses; rather, the options for dissonance reduction are produced a
priori by the experimenter. Even more problematic, participants are
typically only given one outlet with which to relieve the cognitive
dissonance state. The particular dissonance reducing mechanism
available may not be individuals ’ﬁrst choice, or to speculate, even one
that would be endorsed in a real-world setting where there may be a
number of available options.
When individuals are given multiple ways of alleviating the cogni-
tive dissonance state, the order in which the MRCD reducing mechan-
isms
are presented may be important. For example, following a dis-
sonance manipulation in Tian et al. (2016) , participants reported less
willingness to eat beef when it was assessed before but not after aH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
12measure of the perceived capacities of cows. This reaction is under-
standable given that participants felt tension and arousal, were moti-
vated to reduce this dissonance, and did not necessarily know what
questions were coming next. In such a scenario, it seems logical to re-
duce dissonance the ﬁrst way possible.
This suggests that methodologically, researchers may need to be
careful in drawing conclusions from studies in which participants are
aﬀorded a single way of reducing MRCD. But the di ﬃculty of assessing
MRCD reduction may not end there, for researchers potentially need tobe careful about interpretations when there are multiple outcomes as-
sessing dissonance reduction. To speculate, if scores on one measure
aﬀect scores on the other, the last outcome measured may potentially
be compromised with in ﬂated or depressed scores depending on its
relationship to the ﬁrst outcome. When assessing multiple outlets for
dissonance reduction, therefore, the current framework suggests thatresearchers need to incorporate the order of outcome measure into the
design and analysis.
5.3. Seeking behavioral commitment ﬁrst
InTian et al. (2016) , participants reported lower behavioral com-
mitment to meat when they were given the opportunity to reduce
MRCD behaviorally before perceptually. Although more empirical work
is needed to substantiate this ﬁnding, one interpretation is that when
ﬁrst given a chance to reduce dissonance behaviorally, individuals do
so by reporting that they would eat fewer animal products in the future,
butﬁrst allowing individuals to perceptually reduce their dissonance
led them in the next instance to report that they would consume moremeat products in the future. Once the perceptual denigration has oc-
curred, consistency demands that behavior follows.
For those striving to inhibit meat consumption, the framework
proposes that if you want individuals to respond to MRCD in a positiveway, it is critical that they immediately be asked to make some beha-
vioral commitment, or else they may reduce their arousal by percep-
tually denigrating animals. In the absence of a behavioral commitment,
then, appeals to vegetarianism or meat reduction will not only be
neutralized, one may speculate that they may back ﬁre by increasing
negative sentiment toward animals. Research on the foot-in-the-doorphenomenon ( Freedman & Fraser, 1966 ) implies that it would be wise
to initially ask for modest behavioral commitment and then subse-quently seek larger changes. Flexitarianism is less threatening than
vegetarianism is ( Rosenfeld, 2018 ), and such an approach would likely
be more agreeable and may allow individuals to develop self-e ﬃcacy as
non-meat eaters, begin to identify themselves as such, and gradually
build increasing disgust toward meat (see Rozin, Markwith, & Stoess,
1997 ).
5.4. Linking MRCD to external factors and the polarizing nature of thesefactors
In addition to providing insight to researchers interested in mea-
suring MRCD and to actors tasked with reducing meat consumption, thecurrent framework proposes that MRCD may be connected to and re-
levant in predicting individuals' reactions to broader societal changes
implicating meat. It speculates that certain situations (e.g., cost of meat,
prominence of plant-based substitutes, and campaigns to increase
awareness of animal su ﬀering) heighten individuals' awareness that
they are meat eaters and the aversive arousal associated with theireating behavior. The MRCD framework suggests that these situations
will subsequently trigger motivated processes to reduce this unpleasantcognitive dissonance state, inducing behavioral change in some but
increasing strategically negative perceptions about animals in other
individuals. Thus, individuals ’perceptions of animals may be shaped by
seemingly unrelated outside factors.
Price of meat . From a classical dissonance perspective, the more
that something costs psychologically or materially, the more thatindividuals need to justify behavior through strategic perceptions. This
would suggest that as the price of meat increases, so too would in-
dividuals ’need to convince themselves that meat is worth it –that
 it
tastes delicious, is nutritious –and the more they would need to dis-
count criticisms such as animal su ﬀering. But this prediction is not
entirely clear because even when the cost of meat is lowered, the basicsof the meat paradox remain, as opposed to classic dissonance tests of
increased cost that feature truly low or no cost conditions (e.g., Aronson
& Mills, 1959).
Economists who study the meat paradox have reached alternative
conclusions about the impact of the price of meat ( Hestermann et al.,
2018 ;Rabin, 1994 ). As meat prices increase, they posit that individuals
experience less utility for the behavior and purchase less meat. Thisfrees the conscience, lowering the pressure to convince themselves that
eating meat is morally defensible, which means engaging in less moti-
vated perceptions defending the practice. That is, the incentives to deny
the negative consequences of meat consumption shrink. As meat price is
lowered, however, the bene ﬁts of self-deception increase as do justi ﬁ-
cations. This proposition needs further testing.
Prominence of plant-based meat substitutes . The meat substitute
market reached an estimated $4.63 billion USD in 2018 ( https://www.
marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/meat-substitutes.asp ), and has
even in ﬂuenced traditionally meat heavy restaurants such as the fast
food chain Burger King to feature a vegetarian burger option. As al-
ternatives to meat become more prominent, accessible, and visible,
some MRCD prevention strategies such as avoidance and dissociation
become harder to maintain. The framework would speculate that these
product trends will further exacerbate a decline in meat consumption
for individuals ambivalent about eating meat and who rely on MRCD
prevention mechanisms. Conversely, individuals who are more at-
tached to meat may be predicted to react quite di ﬀerently to the pro-
minence of plant-based meat substitutes. For such individuals, theseproducts will likely increase MRCD, increasing the need for motivatedperceptions to reduce the cognitive dissonance state, ultimately in-
creasing meat consumption. One may speculate that committed meat
eaters would be less likely to purchase these meat alternatives or even
try them because in doing so, they would be generating more MRCD on
future occasions when they did consume meat. Experimenting with
plant-based foods would be an implicit acknowledgment of accepting
the arguments against meat, and this would be expected to make it
psychologically more di ﬃcult for these individuals to eat meat in the
future.
Campaigns to increase moral awareness of animal su ﬀering .I n
the last decade, NGO activists have increasingly pursued advertisingcampaigns to increase moral awareness of animal su ﬀering with the
goal of reducing meat consumption. These inﬂ uence e ﬀorts increase the
moral costs associated with eating meat. From the perspective of the
current framework, what is critical about these messages is that they
heighten collective MRCD –by appealing to the immorality or harm in
eating meat, they are predicted to cause meat eaters to experiencegreater aversive arousal from their eating behavior. Consistent with the
activists ’aims, for some individuals, most notably women holding lib-
eral values and sensitive to animal welfare, the MRCD prompted bythese messages would be expected to likely produce some degree of
behavioral change, from going completely vegan to reducing meat in-
take more incrementally. On the other hand, for individuals with
greater attachment to meat, men holding conservative values and less
sensitive to animal welfare, the increase in moral pressure and MRCD
produced by these messages is predicted to most likely be psychologi-
cally reduced, through motivated cognitions designed to alleviate the
cognitive dissonance associated with their eating behavior. Such justi-
ﬁcations in turn are thought to make eating meat feel more compelling
and legitimate, which in turn is speculated to lead these individuals toconsume more meat. Thus, moralizing meat eating is proposed to have
the eﬀect
of polarizing reactions to it: Some will behaviorally reduce
MRCD by eating less meat, but others will psychologically reduceH. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
13MRCD and end up consuming more meat (see Bastian, 2019;H e ﬀerman
et al., 2018; Rabin, 1994). This proposition awaits empirical tests.
6. Conclusion
The subtitle of McWilliams ’(2017) The Modern Savage: Our Un-
thinking Decision to Eat Animals has it partially correct. Individuals do
not like to think about the moral complexities involved in eating meat
and would rather push these considerations aside, lest they risk ex-
periencing aversive arousal. But if unthinking implies that individuals
do not expend any mental energy when it comes to eating animals, the
present work suggests something di ﬀerent. Situations that trigger
MRCD dictate that individuals think in motivated ways to lessen thecognitive dissonance state. The speci ﬁc perception endorsed depends
on a number of factors delineated here, but the important point is thatsuch perceptions are not rational or objective. Information-based ap-
peals to reduce meat consumption may produce behavioral change in
those receptive to it, but for many individuals these appeals will only
bolster meat consumption through increased justi ﬁcation. The chal-
lenge for stakeholders, therefore, is how to properly massage MRCDgiven its polarizing impact.
References
Adams, C. (1990). The sexual politics of meat: A feminist vegetarian critical theory. New York:
Continuum .
Allen, M. W., Gupta, R., & Monnier, A. (2008). The interactive e ﬀect of cultural symbols
and human values on taste evaluation. Journal of Consumer Research, 35 , 294 –308.
Allen, M. W., & Hung Ng, S. (2003). Human values, utilitarian bene ﬁts and identi ﬁcation:
The case of meat. European Journal of Social Psychology, 33 ,3 7–56.
Allen, M., Wilson, M., Ng, S., & Dunne, M. (2000). Values and beliefs of vegetarians and
omnivores. The Journal of Social Psychology, 140 , 405 –423.
Anderson, M. V., & Henderson, A. J. (2005). Pernicious portrayals: The impact of chil-
dren ’s attachment to animals of ﬁction on animals of fact. Society and Animals, 13 ,
297–314.
Ang, C. S., Chan, N. N., & Singh, L. (2019). A comparison study of meat eaters and non-
meat eaters on mind attribution and moral disengagement of animals. Appetite, 136 ,
80–85.
Aronson, E. (1968). Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. P. Abelson, E.
Aronson, W. J. McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg, & P. H. Tannenbaum
(Eds.). Theories of cognitive consistency: A sourcebook (pp. 5 –27). Chicago: Rand
McNally .
Aronson, E., & Mills, J. (1959). The e ﬀect of severity of initiation on liking for a group.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59 (2), 177 –181.
Bandura, A. (1990). Selective activation and disengagement of moral control. Journal of
Social Issues, 46 ,2 7–46.
Bandura, A. (1999). Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhumanities. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 3 , 193 –209.
Barkan, R., Ayal, S., & Ariely, D. (2015). Ethical dissonance, justi ﬁcations, and moral
behavior. Current Opinion in Psychology, 6 (DEC), 157 –161.
Barr, S. I., & Chapman, G. E. (2002). Perceptions and practices of self-de ﬁned current
vegetarian, former vegetarian, and nonvegetarian women. Journal of the American
Dietetic Association, 102 (3), 354 –360.
Bastian,
B. (2019). Changing ethically troublesome behavior: The causes, consequences,
and solutions to motivated resistance. Social Issues and Policy Review, 13 ,6 3–92.
Bastian, B., & Loughnan, S. (2017). Resolving the meat-paradox: A motivational account
of morally troublesome behavior and its maintenance. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 21 , 278 –299.
Bastian, B., Loughnan, S., Haslam, N., & Radke, H. (2012). Don't mind meat? The denial of
mind to animals used for human consumption. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 38 , 247 –256.
Beardsworth, A. D., & Keil, E. T. (1991). Vegetarianism, veganism, and meat avoidance:
Recent trends and ﬁndings. British Food Journal, 93 ,1 9–24.
Beardsworth, A., & Keil, T. (1992). The vegetarian option: Varieties, conversions, motives
and careers. The Sociological Review, 40 , 253 –293.
Beauvois, J. L., & Joule, R. (1981). Soumission et idéologies: Psychosociologie de la ratio-
nalisation. Presses universitaires de France.
Bénabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2016). Mindful economics: The production, consumption, and
value of beliefs. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30 , 141 –164.
Bilewicz, M., Imho ﬀ, R., & Drogosz, M. (2011). The humanity of what we eat:
Conceptions of human uniqueness among vegetarians and omnivores. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 41 , 201 –209.
Broida, J., Tingley, L., Kimball, R., & Miele, J. (1993). Personality di ﬀerences between
pro-and anti-vivisectionists. Society and Animals, 1 , 129 –144.
Buttlar, B., & Walther, E. (2018). Measuring the meat paradox: How ambivalence towards
meat in ﬂuences moral disengagement. Appetite, 128 , 152 –158.
Carrington, M. J., Neville, B. A., & Whitwell, G. J. (2014). Lost in translation: Exploring
the ethical consumer intention –behavior gap. Journal of Business Research, 67 ,2759 –2767 .
Clark, B., Stewart, G. B., Panzone, L. A., Kyriazakis, I., & Frewer, L. J. (2016). A systematic
review of public attitudes, perceptions and behaviours towards production diseasesassociated with farm animal welfare. Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics,
29, 455 –478.
Coleman, G., & Toukhsati, S. (2006). Consumer attitudes and behaviour relevant to the red
meat industry. North
 Sydney NSW: Meat and Livestock Australia Limited.
Cooper, J. (1971). Personal responsibility and dissonance: The role of foreseen con-
sequences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 18 , 354 –363.
Cooper, J. (2007). Cognitive dissonance: 50 years of a classic theory. Sage .
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory. In L. Berkowitz (Vol.
Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology: Vol. 17 , (pp. 229 –262). New York:
Academic Press .
Cooper, J., & Worchel, S. (1970). Role of undesired consequences in arousing cognitive
dissonance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16 , 312 –320.
Cramer, H., Kessler, C. S., Sundberg, T., Leach, M. J., Schumann, D., Adams, J., et al.
(2017). Characteristics of Americans choosing vegetarian and vegan diets for healthreasons. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 49 , 561 –567.
Dhont, K., & Hodson, G. (2014). Why do right-wing adherents engage in more animal
exploitation and meat consumption? Personality and Individual Di ﬀerences, 64 ,1 2–17.
Dhont, K., Hodson, G., Costello, K., & MacInnis, C. C. (2014). Social dominance or-
ientation connects prejudicial human –human and human –animal relations.
Personality and Individual Di ﬀerences, 61 , 105 –108.
Dhont, K., Hodson, G., & Leite, A. C. (2016). Common ideological roots of speciesism and
generalized ethnic prejudice: The social dominance human –animal relations model
(SD‐HARM). European Journal of Personality, 30 , 507 –522.
Dowsett, E., Semmler, C., Bray, H., Ankeny, R. A., & Chur-Hansen, A. (2018). Neutralising
the meat paradox: Cognitive dissonance, gender, and eating animals. Appetite, 123 ,
280–288.
Eldridge, J., & Gluck, J. (1996). Gender di ﬀerences in attitudes toward animal research.
Ethics & Behavior, 6 , 239 –256.
European Commission (2006). Special eurobarometer 270. September –October, Available
online http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_270_en.pdf , Accessed
date: 15 January 2018.
Feinberg, M., & Willer, R. (2013). The moral roots of environmental attitudes.
Psychological Science, 24 ,5 6–62.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance ,Vol.
 2. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
University press .
Foer, J. S. (2009). Eating animals. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company .
Forestell, C. A., & Nezlek, J. B. (2018). Vegetarianism, depression, and the ﬁve factor
model of personality. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 57 , 246 –259.
Francione, G. L. (2004). Animals –Property or persons? In C. R. Sunstein, & M. C.
Nussbaum (Eds.). Animal rights: Current debates and new directions . Oxford University
Press .
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance without pressure: The foot-in-the-door
technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4 , 195 –202.
Gallup (2018). Snapshot: Few Americans vegetarian or vegan. Gallup . August 1, Retrieved
from https://news.gallup.com/poll/238328/snapshot-few-americans-vegetarian-
vegan.aspx?g_source=link_NEWSV9&g_medium=NEWSFEED&g_campaign=item_&g_content=Snapshot%3a%2520Few%2520Americans%2520Vegetarian%2520or
%2520Vegan .
Goethals, G. R., & Cooper, J. (1972). Role of intention and postbehavioral consequence in
the arousal of cognitive dissonance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 23 ,
292–301.
Gossard, M. H., & York, R. (2003). Social structural in ﬂuences on meat consumption.
Human Ecology Review, 1–9.
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and conservatives rely on di ﬀerent
sets of moral foundations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96 , 1029 –1046 .
Gray, K., Young, L., & Waytz, A. (2012). Mind perception is the essence of morality.
Psychological Inquiry, 23 (2), 101 –124.
Graça, J., Calheiros, M. M., & Oliveira, A. (2015). Attached to meat?(Un) Willingness and
intentions to adopt a more plant-based diet. Appetite, 95 , 113 –125.
Graça, J., Calheiros, M. M., & Oliveira, A. (2016). Situating moral disengagement:
Motivated reasoning in meat consumption and substitution. Personality and Individual
Diﬀerences, 90 , 353 –364.
Harper, G., & Henson, S. (2001). Consumer concerns about animal welfare and the impact on
food choice. EU FAIR CT98-3678. Centre for Food Economics Research, The University
of Reading .
Herzog, H. (2010). Some we love, some we hate, some we eat: Why it's so hard to think straight
about animals. New York, NY: HarperCollins .
Hestermann, 
N., Le Yaouanq, Y., & Treich, N. (2018). An economic model of the meat
paradox. Working Papers, 1–29.
Hoﬀarth, M. R., Azevedo, F., & Jost, J. T. (2019). Political conservatism and the exploitation
of non-human animals: An application of system justiﬁ cation theory. Group Processes and
Intergroup Relations (in press) .
Hoogland, C. T., de Boer, J., & Boersema, J. J. (2005). Transparency of the meat chain in
the light of food culture and history. Appetite, 45 ,1 5–23.
Hoshino-Browne, E., Zanna, A. S., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Kitayama, S., &
Lackenbauer, S. (2005). On the cultural guises of cognitive dissonance: The case ofEasterners and Westerners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89 , 294 –310.
Iacobbo, K., & Iacobbo, M. (2006). Vegetarians and vegans in America today. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Publishing Group .
Jabs, J., Sobal, J., & Devine, C. M. (2000). Managing vegetarianism: Identities, norms and
interactions. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 39 (5), 375 –394.
Joy, M. (2011). Why we love dogs, eat pigs, and wear cows: An introduction to carnism. San
Francisco, CA: Conari Press .H. Rothgerber
Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
14Kalof, L., Dietz, T., Stern, P. C., & Guagnano, G. A. (1999). Social psychological and
structural in ﬂuences on vegetarian beliefs. Rural Sociology, 64 , 500 –511.
Kellert, S. R., & Berry, J. K. (1987). Attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors toward wildlife
as aﬀected by gender. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 15 , 363 –371.
Kenyon, P. M., & Barker, M. E. (1998). Attitudes towards meat-eating in vegetarian and
non-vegetarian teenage girls in England –an ethnographic approach. Appetite, 30 ,
185–198.
Kitayama, S., Snibbe, A. C., Markus, H. R., & Suzuki, T. (2004). Is there any “free ”choice?
Self and dissonance in two cultures. Psychological Science, 15 , 527 –533.
Knight, S., & Barnett, L. (2008). Justifying attitudes toward animal use: A qualitative
study of people's views and beliefs. Anthrozoös, 21 ,3 1–42.
Knight, S., Nunkoosing, K., Vrij, A., & Cherryman, J. (2003). Using grounded theory to
examine people's attitudes toward how animals are used. Society and Animals, 11 ,
307–327.
Knight, S., Vrij, A., Cherryman, J., & Nunkoosing, K. (2004). Attitudes towards animal use
and belief in animal mind. Anthrozoös, 17 ,4 3–62.
Kriﬂik, L. S., & Yeatman, H. (2005). Food scares and sustainability: A consumer per-
spective. Health, Risk & Society, 7 ,1 1–24.
Kubberod, E., et al. (2002b). Gender speci ﬁc preferences and attitudes towards meat.
Food Quality and Preference, 13 , 285 –294.
Kubberod, E., Ueland, O., Tronstad, A., & Risvik, E. (2002a). Attitudes toward meat and
meat-eating among adolescents in Norway: A qualitative study. Appetite, 38 ,5 3–62.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 108 , 480 –498.
Kunst, J. R., & Haugestad, C. A. P. (2018). The e ﬀects of dissociation on willingness to eat
meat are moderated by exposure to unprocessed meat: A cross-cultural demonstra-
tion. Appetite, 120 , 356 –366.
Kunst, J. R., & Hohle, S. M. (2016). Meat eaters by dissociation: How we present, prepare
and
talk about meat increases willingness to eat meat by reducing empathy and
disgust. Appetite, 105 , 758 –774.
Lea, E., & Worsley, A. (2001). In ﬂuences on meat consumption in Australia. Appetite, 36 ,
127–136.
Linder, D. E., Cooper, J., & Jones, E. E. (1967). Decision freedom as a determinant of the
role of incentive magnitude in attitude change. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 6 , 245 –254.
Loughnan, S., Bastian, B., & Haslam, N. (2014). The psychology of eating animals. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 23 , 104 –108.
Loughnan, S., & Davies, T. (2019). The meat paradox. In K. Dhont, & G. Hodson (Eds.).
Why people love and exploit animals: Bridging insights from academia and
advocacy Oxford: Routledge (Taylor & Francis Group Ltd) (in press) .
Loughnan, S., Haslam, N., & Bastian, B. (2010). The role of meat consumption in the
denial of moral status and mind to meat animals. Appetite, 55 , 156 –159.
MacInnis, C. C., & Hodson, G. (2017). It ain't easy eating greens: Evidence of bias toward
vegetarians and vegans from both source and target. Group Processes & Intergroup
Relations, 20 (6), 721 –744.
Maurer, D. (2010). Vegetarianism: Movement or moment: Promoting a lifestyle for cult change.
Temple University Press .
Mayﬁeld, L. E., Bennett, R. M., Tranter, R. B., & Wooldridge, M. J. (2007). Consumption
of welfare-friendly food products in Great Britain, Italy and Sweden, and how it maybe inﬂuenced by consumer attitudes to, and behaviour towards, animal welfare at-
tributes. International Journal of Sociology of Food and Agriculture, 15 ,5 9–73.
McKimmie, B. M., Terry, D. J., Hogg, M. A., Manstead, A. S., Spears, R., & Doosje, B.
(2003). I'm a hypocrite, but so is everyone else: Group support and the reduction ofcognitive dissonance. Group Dynamics: Theory, research, and practice, 7 , 214 –224.
McWilliams, J. (2017). The modern savage: Our unthinking decision to eat animals. New
York: St. Martin ’s Press .
Miele, M. (2010). Report concerning consumer perceptions and attitudes towards farm animal
welfare Brussels, Belgium: European Animal Welfare Platform.
Minson, J. A., & Monin, B. (2012). Do-gooder derogation: Disparaging morally motivated
minorities to defuse anticipated reproach. Social Psychological and Personality Science,
3(2), 200 –207.
Monin, B., Sawyer, P. J., & Marquez, M. J. (2008). The rejection of moral rebels:
Resenting those who do the right thing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
95,7 6–93.
Monteiro,
C. A., Pfeiler, T. M., Patterson, M. D., & Milburn, M. A. (2017). The Carnism
inventory: Measuring the ideology of eating animals. Appetite, 113 ,5 1–62.
Neﬀ, R. A., Edwards, D., Palmer, A., Ramsing, R., Righter, A., & Wolfson, J. (2018).
Reducing meat consumption in the USA: A nationally representative survey of atti-tudes and behaviours. Public Health Nutrition, 21 , 1835 –1844 .
Norwood, F. B. (2011). The private provision of animal-friendly eggs and pork. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 94 (2), 509 –514.
Norwood, F. B., & Lusk, J. L. (2011). Compassion, by the pound: The economics of farm
animal welfare. Oxford University Press .
OECD (2014). OECD/Food and agriculture organization of the united nations (2014), OECD-
FAO agricultural outlook 2014 OECD Publishing https://doi.org/10.1787/agr_outlook-
2014-en . Retrieved from, Accessed date: August 2018.
Onwezen, M. C., & van der Weele, C. N. (2016). When indi ﬀerence is ambivalence:
Strategic ignorance about meat consumption. Food Quality and Preference, 52 ,
96–105.
O'Connor, K., & Monin, B. (2016). When principled deviance becomes moral threat:
Testing alternative mechanisms for the rejection of moral rebels. Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations, 19 (5), 676 –693.
Paul, E. S. (1996). The representation of animals on children's television. Anthrozoös, 9 ,
169–181.
Peden, R., Camerlink, I., Boyle, L., Loughnan, S., Akaichi, F., & Turner, S. (2019). Belief in
pigs' capacity to su ﬀer: An assessment of pig farmers, veterinarians, students, and
citizens. Anthrozoös (in press) .Piazza, J. (2019). Why people love animals yet continue to eat them in K. In Dhont &, & G.
Hodson (Eds.). Why people love and exploit animals: Bridging insights from academia and
advocacy Oxford: Routledge (Taylor & Francis Group Ltd) (in press) .
Piazza, J., Ruby, M. B., Loughnan, S., Luong, M., Kulik, J., Watkins, H. M., et al. (2015).
Rationalizing meat consumption. The 4Ns. Appetite, 91 , 114 –128.
Plous, S. (1993). Psychological mechanisms in the human use of animals. Journal of Social
Issues, 49 ,1 1–52.
Pohjolainen, P., Vinnari, M., & Jokinen, P. (2015). Consumers' perceived barriers to
following a plant-based diet. British Food Journal, 117 , 1150 –1167 .
Pollan, M. (2002). An animal's place. The New York Times November 10, 2002 .
Prättälä, 
R., Paalanen, L., Grinberga, D., Helasoja, V., Kasmel, A., & Petkeviciene, J.
(2006). Gender di ﬀerences in the consumption of meat, fruit and vegetables are si-
milar in Finland and the Baltic countries. The European Journal of Public Health, 17 ,
520–525.
Proulx, T., Inzlicht, M., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2012). Understanding all inconsistency
compensation as a palliative response to violated expectations. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 16 , 285 –291.
Rabin, M. (1994). Cognitive dissonance and social change. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 23 (2), 177 –194.
Roex, J., & Miele, M. (2005). Farm animal welfare concerns. Consumers, retailers and pro-
ducers. Cardi ﬀ: School of city and regional planning CardiﬀUniversity Welfare Quality
Reports no. 1 .
Rosenfeld, D. (2018). The psychology of vegetarianism: Recent advances and future di-
rections. Appetite, 131 , 125 –138.
Rosenfeld, D., Rothgerber, H., & Tomiyama, A. J. (2019). From mostly vegetarian to fully
vegetarian: Meat avoidance and the expression of social identity. (Unpublished manu-
script) .
Rothgerber, H. (2013). Real men don't eat (vegetable) quiche: Masculinity and the jus-
tiﬁcation of meat consumption. Psychology of Men and Masculinity, 14 , 363 –375.
Rothgerber, H. (2014a). E ﬀorts to overcome vegetarian-induced dissonance among meat
eaters. Appetite, 79 ,3 2–41.
Rothgerber, H. (2014b). A comparison of attitudes toward meat and animals among strict
and semi-vegetarians. Appetite, 72 ,9 8–105.
Rothgerber, H. (2015a). Can you have your meat and eat it too? Conscientious omnivores,
vegetarians, and adherence to diet. Appetite, 84 , 196 –203.
Rothgerber, H. (2015b). Underlying di ﬀerences between conscientious omnivores and
vegetarians in the evaluation of meat and animals. Appetite, 87 , 251 –258.
Rothgerber, H. (2019a). How we love and hurt animals: Considering cognitive dissonance
in young meat eaters. In G. Hodson, & K. Dhont (Eds.). Why people Love and exploit
animals: Bridging Insights from Academia and advocacy. Routledge Taylor & Francis
Group (in press) .
Rothgerber, H. (2019b). “But I don't eat that much meat: ”Situational underreporting of
meat consumption by women. Society and Animals, 27 , 150 –173.
Rothschild, Z. K., & Keefer, L. A. (2017). A cleansing ﬁre: Moral outrage alleviates guilt
and bu ﬀers threats to one's moral identity. Motivation and Emotion, 41 (2), 209 –229.
Rothschild, Z. K., Landau, M. J., Sullivan, D., & Keefer, L. A. (2012). A dual-motive model
of scapegoating: Displacing blame to reduce guilt or increase control. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 102 (6), 1148 –1163 .
Rozin, P. (2007). Food and eating. In S. Kitayama, & D. Cohen (Eds.). The handbook of
cultural psychology (pp. 391 –416). New York, NY: The Guilford Press .
Rozin, P., Hormes, J. M., Faith, M. S., & Wansink, B. (2012). Is meat male? A quantitative
multimethod framework to establish metaphoric relationships. Journal of Consumer
Research, 39 (3), 629 –643.
Rozin, P., Markwith, M., & Stoess, C. (1997). Moralization and becoming a vegetarian:
The transformation of preferences into values and the recruitment of disgust.Psychological Science, 8 (2), 67 –73.
Ruby, M. B., & Heine, S. J. (2012). Too close to home. Factors predicting meat avoidance.
Appetite, 59 ,4 7–52.
Santos, M., & Booth, D. (1996). In ﬂuences on meat avoidance among British students.
Appetite, 27 , 197 –205.
Schröder, M. J., & McEachern, M. G. (2004). Consumer value con ﬂicts surrounding
ethical food purchase decisions: A focus on animal welfare. International Journal of
Consumer Studies, 28 , 168 –177.
Šedová, I., Slovák, Ľ., & Je žková, I. (2016). Coping with unpleasant knowledge: Meat
eating among students of environmental studies. Appetite, 107 , 415 –424.
Serpell, J. (1986). The company of animals: A study of human-animal relationships.
Cambridge University Press .
Shalvi, S., Gino, F., Barkan, R., & Ayal, S. (2015). Self-serving justi ﬁcations: Doing wrong
and feeling moral. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24 (2), 125 –130.
Signicom (1997). Dierenwelzijn in de bio-industrie. Amsterdam: Signicom .
Singer, 
P. (2002). Animal liberation. New York, NY: Harper Collins .
Smith, T. W., Marsden, P., Hou, M., & Kim, J. (2017). General social surveys, 1972 –2016
[machine-readable data ﬁle]. Sponsored by national science foundation. –NORC Ed. –
Chicago, IL: National OpinionResearch center [producer]Storrs, CT: The Roper Centerfor PublicOpinion Research, University of Connecticut. [distributor]. Retrieved from
http://www3.norc.org/GSS_Website/Download/SPSS_Format/ .
Statista (2016). Meat consumption and vegetarianism in Europe –statistics and facts.
Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/topics/3345/meat-consumption-and-
vegetarianism-in-europe/ .
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-a ﬃrmation: Sustaining the integrity of the
self. In L. Berkowitz (Vol. Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology: Vol. 21 , (pp.
261–302). San Diego, CA: Academic Press .
Stewart, K., & Cole, M. (2009). The conceptual separation of food and animals in child-
hood. Food, Culture and Society, 12 , 457 –476.
Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2001). A self-standards model of cognitive dissonance. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 37 , 228 –243.H. Rothgerber
Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
15Stroebe, W., & Diehl, M. (1981). Conformity and counterattitudinal behavior: The e ﬀect
of social support on attitude change. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14 ,
136–144.
Sunstein, C. (2004). Introduction: What are animal rights? In C. R. Sunstein, & M. C.
Nussbaum (Eds.). Animal rights: Current debates and new directions . Oxford University
Press .
Sykes, G. M., & Matza, D. (1957). Techniques of neutralization: A theory of delinquency.
American Sociological Review, 22 , 664 –670.
Szmigin, I., Carrigan, M., & McEachern, M. G. (2009). The conscious consumer: Taking a
ﬂexible approach to ethical behaviour. International Journal of Consumer Studies, 33 ,
224–231.
Te Velde, H., Aarts, N., & Van Woerkum, C. (2002). Dealing with ambivalence: Farmers'
and consumers' perceptions of animal welfare in livestock breeding. Journal of
Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, 15 (2), 203 –219.
The Sentience Institute (2017). New poll shows majority uncomfortable with animal
farming despite eating turkeys for Thanksgiving. November, 20, Retrieved from
https://www.sentienceinstitute.org/press/animal-farming-attitudes-survey-2017 .
Tian, Q., Hilton, D., & Becker, M. (2016). Confronting the meat paradox in di ﬀerent
cultural contexts: Reactions among Chinese and French participants. Appetite, 96 ,
187–194.
Time/CNN/Harris Interactive Poll (2002). Do you consider yourself a vegetarian?
Available at: http://i.timeinc.net/time/covers/1101020715/poll/images/poll_body.gif.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. S. (1987).
Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory. Oxford, UK: Blackwell .
Vaidis, D. C., & Bran, A. (2018). Some prior considerations about dissonance to under-
stand its reduction: Comment on McGrath (2017). Social and Personality Psychology
Compass, 12 (9), e12411 .
Vanhonacker, F., Verbeke, W., Van Poucke, E., & Tuyttens, F. (2007). Segmentation based
on consumers' perceived importance and attitude toward farm animal welfare.
International Journal of Sociology of Agriculture and Food, 15 ,9 1–107.
Verbeke, W., Pérez-Cueto, F. J., de Barcellos, M. D., Krystallis, A., & Grunert, K. G. (2010).
European citizen and consumer attitudes and preferences regarding beef and pork.
Meat Science, 84 , 284 –292.
Vollum, S., Bu ﬃngton-Vollum, J., & Longmire, D. R. (2004). Moral disengagement and
attitudes about violence toward animals. Society and Animals, 12 , 209 –235.
Wang, F., & Basso, F. (2019). “Animals are friends, not food ”: Anthropomorphism leads to
less favorable attitudes toward meat consumption by inducing feelings of antici-patory guilt. Appetite, 153–173.
Worsley, 
A., Wang, W., & Ridley, S. (2015). Australian adults' knowledge of Australian
agriculture. British Food Journal, 117 (1), 400 –411.
Zane, D. M., Irwin, J. R., & Reczek, R. W. (2016). Do less ethical consumers denigrate
more ethical consumers? The e ﬀect of willful ignorance on judgments of others.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 26 , 337 –349.H. Rothgerber Appetite 146 (2020) 104511
16